 The following is a conversation with Will Sasso, a comedian, actor, podcaster, and someone I've been a fan of for many years since Mad TV in the late nineties to recently with the 10 minute podcast and now the new podcast called Doodsy. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor, check them out in the description, it's the best way to support this podcast. We've got 8 Sleep for naps, Athletic Greens for multi vitamins, Better Help for mental health, On It for supplements, and indeed for hiring. Choose wisely my friends. And now onto the full ad reads, as always no ads in the middle. I find those ultra super annoying. And since I get to decide how to do things with this particular podcast, I don't like to do annoying things. But I still try to say interesting things, sometimes only half related to the sponsors. So maybe you would like to listen, please, you skip, please still check out the sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This episode is brought to you by 8 Sleep and it's pod three mattress. So I just took a nap. I feel incredible. I passed off for 20 minutes. All on my 8 Sleep bed, both the mattress and the mattress cover is an 8 Sleep. The surface of the mattress was cold to a perfect temperature with a warm blanket. I turned off like an old Pentium PC in a matter of seconds. I turned back on like an old Pentium PC with a sound. Actually took a really long time for those things to boot, but it was always excitement, anticipation back in my day. We used to walk both ways uphill to get an image from the internet. Anyway, you can get the pod three cover. You don't have to use their mattress. You can put the cover on your own mattress. It's all awesome. Whatever you do, it's awesome. I guarantee it. Check it out and get special savings. When you go to 8sleep.com slash Lex. This show is also brought to you by athletic greens and it's a G one drink. Which is an all in one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. I drink it twice a day. Sometimes I forget the travel packs when I'm traveling and I miss it. I look out the window and I wonder, what is this all for? Why are we here? In fact, I do that with athletic greens too, but, um, there's a little more zest to it with athletic greens. What am I even talking in these ads? I wonder if anyone's actually listening. Like I can literally say anything. I wonder if there's like just two people too drunk to skip ads. They're just listening to this right now. Well, I'm with you brothers and sisters. What was I talking about? I don't know, but you should check out athletic greens and you'll get a one month supply of fish oil when you sign up at athletic greens.com slash Lex. And given this ad read that will, uh, very quickly, uh, cancel their support. I'm very sure. No, they love me. I love them no matter what, whether they're a sponsor or not. I will always love athletic greens. This episode is also brought to you by better help spelled H E L P help. I often go in my mind to a place where I'm just sitting alone on a desert island. I imagine talking to that volleyball Wilson and just the peace of being away from humanity for a time. So you can be alone with your thoughts. I imagine that. And I also imagine writing help in the sand when I'm too sick of my own thoughts. Speaking of being too sick of your own thoughts. That's just a funny thing to say. Of course, your thoughts dark or beautiful, low or high are your lifelong companions and you should bring them to the surface and you should play with them. You should dance with them. And a talk therapy is one way to do that. I think podcast things, a kind of talk therapy, that's a way to do that. So you should really try out better help, which is a way to do online talk therapy. You can check them out at betterhelp.com slash Lex and save on your first month. This episode is also brought to you by on it and nutrition supplement and fitness company, they make alpha brain and utropic that helps support memory, mental speed, and focus. Like I said, I just took a nap. That's a component. Number one of ultra focus component. Number two for me is caffeine. Then of course there's the Zen like maybe people think of a this meditation ability to block out all the other distractions. But even then, sometimes that's not enough. If you really want to accomplish something difficult, mentally speaking. And so for that, I will take an alpha brain every once in a while to help me be the extra super boost for that deep work session, by which I mean sitting there staring at a thing, thinking about how to do that, and then I'll try to think thinking about it and not allowing your mind to deviate from the focus on that thing. Anyway, you can get a special discount on alpha brain at Lex Friedman.com slash on it. This show is also brought to you by indeed hiring website. I've used them many times, many, many times in the past for the hiring efforts I've done for the teams that have led teams have been a part of. I'm doing quite a bit of hiring now for the podcast creative kind of efforts. A lot of us spend a lot of our day working on a thing. Hopefully it's a thing that you really enjoy doing. When it's the thing you enjoy doing, there's to me at least nothing more rewarding than doing it with people you care about, people that inspire you, people that challenge you, people that teach you stuff. So a great team is a beautiful thing. So I really, really care about good hiring, uh, tools, services, websites, and indeed is, um, great at that. Anyway, and I'm also hiring quite a bit for a lot of things I'm doing now. I'm a little bit behind schedule on that, but I will get to all the resumes quickly. And I'm also using Indeed as part of this effort. They have a special offer only available for limited time. Check it out at indeed.com slash Lex. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now dear friends, here's Will Sasso. So let's call it the elephant in the room. You wore a black suit in a recent episode of Doodsy. Yes. You wore a black suit again today. Shakespeare, then Mark Twain said clothes make the man. Uh, what kind of man does a suit make you? Well, me in particular, it makes me a fellow who did not get this dry cleaned in between. Cause that episode of the show, as we sit here now was around a week ago. So that's, that's the kind of man it makes me. Well, the, uh, the nice things you're wearing pants, I think. Yes, I am wearing pants. I don't think you were wearing pants. In the episode. That's correct. I prefer to wear shorts, but this was a special occasion. So I'm wearing pants and I thought it fitting obviously to just wear, you know, the black tie and, uh, clothes do make them in. And I'm a, I would not consider myself to be a man of leisure, but I do enjoy shorts. Yeah. Cause I, my legs get hot. So that's what kind of man the shorts make me wear suit. I fucking hate wearing suits. So what is this a statement of, uh, is it ironic or is it, are you honoring the gods of this particular podcast? I'm honoring the gods of this particular podcast would be a good way to put it. Yes. No, this is, this is in reverence of and in dedication to you and our newfound friendship here, which we are, uh, making on the podcast. You and I just met everything that we're saying here is the first things that we're saying to each other. So I'm meeting you on common ground dressed like, well, I'm not going to do that. I'm dressed like, well, I've been actually a one way friend of yours for many, many years. It's mad TV. Oh, um, when did you start on Matt T so that was, I mean, in nineties, 97, yeah. Ninety seven. So I was a huge fan of yours and the cast was incredible. It was one of the funniest shows ever created that your whole journey watching through that was, was incredible from Matt TV to three suges to the podcasts, the, uh, the 10 minute pod. And then the new podcast is incredible. Um, cheers. My favorite role that you played was the mountain in the game of Thrones. What was it like working with dragons? Well, the dragons are usually tennis balls on the end of sea stands, but, uh, sometimes they, they hang out. Um, I am sea stand. It's like, you know, it's like a little, like the thing you got the camera on here. Oh, this is like film lingo. Yeah. No, I understand. I'm trying to impress you with my film lingo. You know what a banana is? Yeah. When you walk like this, oh, do it a banana. I take it back. I did not know what a banana was. Yeah. See, it means something that yeah. Cause it's just a food. Yeah. Normally, uh, I'm see Hollywood folk with the lingo. And I'm, uh, my name is Bjorn Hapthor Bjornson and I am seven foot four. And, uh, yeah, so dragons don't, dragons don't scare me, even though they've been extinct for a while. Who are you scientists, right? Is that check out? Yeah. I actually, I'm really into video games. I don't know if you play video games. There's a, there's a Skyrim, uh, video game. That's part of the other scroll series. And for the longest time, there's a legend that there's dragons. I think it started in a dagger fall. And so I always, I grew up playing those video games and dreaming of one day meeting a dragon in a virtual world and eventually you did in Skyrim. So it's dragons represent, I don't know exactly what they represent, but they represent maybe this kind of mythical creature that is bigger than anything humans can comp possibly comprehend. Maybe. Cause they're so, they're so, they show up so often in myth from the, from the religious stories, you know, of the snake and so on the serpent. And I don't know what that is with this breathing fire. That's kind of weird. It's interesting when I think about dragons, cause now that you bring it up, these are people that probably wouldn't have access to the fact that there used to be dinosaurs. Right. Maybe they did. If they didn't, they're drawn things that look like, you know, a dinosaur cousin, but cool. They can breathe fire and has wacky wings and a spiked tail. Um, yeah, where the heck did they come up with that? Cause they're clearly of course represented in mythology all the way back to, uh, no, not cave drawings, but the Egyptians probably knew what the, and they could time travel. So they would have gone back to the caves. Well, the aliens that placed living organisms on earth. Could time travel and it could plant legends into the, into the collective intelligence of the human species. Yeah. And perhaps they were thinking of us to do something smart with it. And we didn't, we just came up with a sky. I know. We're just, what's that? Sorry, that was very offensive. I'm sorry. I don't mean to offend you with your video game. I'm more of a burger, a burger time, a Donkey Kong dude. Oh, what is that? That's an original burger time was an arcade game that, uh, later showed up on the in television, um, uh, it was in television, I believe it was made by Texas instruments, horrible first-generation, uh, video game console and burger time. You just, it's like super Mario. You just got to stay away from the eggs and the pickles and stuff. And you just go, and you, the bun falls and then you go down to the, in the cheese and then the meat, I'm not going to say it's as complicated as Skyrim, but, uh, took me a while to finish it when I was seven. Did you play video games? Was that a part of your life, a part of this source of happiness for you at all? It was, it was. I played video games up until around, uh, I think in 2010, I got the red ring of death on my Xbox 360. That was it. That was it. I never, or whatever the Xbox was then. Yeah. I had, I was playing, uh, I had finished, uh, the, the grand theft auto that was out and it finished the red dead redemption. So I was doing that thing where you just drive through the thing where you just drive around, uh, you know, the streets of New York or just ride around on your horse shooting people and, uh, you know, throwing grenades into, into groups of people in, uh, grand theft. And you're, you're describing the same thing that happened a decade later. Cause it's now red dead redemption too. And there's still not a new grand theft auto. So yeah, there isn't right. Yeah. They're working on it. They're always flirting with that idea. You know, who else plays Skyrim? Another person, the two people I'm a huge fan of from that time in that TV is Bobby Lee. He plays Skyrim. He's a huge fan of Scott plays every. So what Bobby Lee loves to do is to grind, do the boring task over and over gather mushroom, like in Skyrim, you can fight dragons, you can fight all kinds of things, but you can also gather mushrooms and different ingredients and make potions and all that kind of stuff. He loves the ingredients that he's the, you know, in the hunter gatherer world, he's the gatherer. He's the gatherer. Yeah. I've heard him described that way and he likes to describe himself that way. Uh, I worked with Bobby not too long ago. He came and did a couple of days on this thing we were shooting and, uh, I was looking forward to catching up with my old pal. And if you know anything about Bobby Lee, you'd probably be able to predict that he spent that entire time playing farming on his iPad. Yeah. Well, humans are a source of anxiety and trouble. So sometimes it's good to escape human interaction through video games. Totally. I'm with him on that. He is, he's one of the funniest people ever. Totally. What do you think is, uh, what do you think makes him funny? It's just all the times you've worked with him. So the, the non-standard, non-sequitur way of his being. Bobby Lee is one of the most raw people, raw performers who lets it all hang out to the degree that he will even get naked in front of his audience, which is usually a metaphor for someone doing stand up, I'm baring all. Yeah. I'm showing you everything and Bobby will just pull his bird out of his pants. Yeah. I don't think he understands metaphor too much. He embodies metaphor. Yes. He embodies metaphor. He's the gather, we call him the gathering metaphor. Bobby, the gatherer metaphor. He's a metaphor for something else, for somebody else's life. Someday he'll be in the dictionary. Yeah. Representing some kind of concept, maybe the metaphor itself. Yeah. Once, once this whole thing falls apart and we are climbing the kudzu vines that spiral up the Sears tower, like they say in Fight Club, Bobby will go back to his gatherer form and be happy as a pig and shit, just walking around in a loin cloth with his bird hanging out, tracking jokes to people and climbing up on them for a stool lap dance or whatever he does. I'd love to dig into something. He, he did, you guys did a lot of great podcasts together. He asked you in a very uncomfortable process of why you don't do stand up. So let me ask you, do you hate money? Do you hate money? Well, I'm originally from Canada. Yeah. So I'm a, I'm, yeah, I'm a, I'm a fricking pinko socialist. Is that what, uh, where you come from? That's not a nice thing to say. I thought the Soviet union, that is a nice thing to say. Like, good call, someone a pinko socialist. Right, comrade. He's a, he's a good, he's a good socialist. Yeah. With red, like bold colors. Yeah. Yeah. There was an interesting tension in your voice and the way you talked about it. There's just not a source of happiness for you. You, you, you respect the art form, but it was not something that you were connected to. You felt connected to. That's a good way to put it. Yeah. I respect the art form a lot. I, and I grew up with all the albums and stuff. I had an older brother and sister who, so I, you know, we had the, we had George Carlin, we had, uh, you know, Richard Pryor, we had Robert Klein, we had Gilda Live, the Gilda Radner, uh, concert. We had, we had all sorts of stuff, but. You know, I don't know. There's a lot of, there's a lot of reasons. I do feel like a career in show business is, you know, they, it never goes the way you plan, uh, like most things. And I was fortunate enough to get started outside of my native Vancouver or in my native Vancouver, I grew up in the burbs outside and there was a lot of industry there, so I was fortunate enough to get started as an actor when I was like 16. So there, there, yeah, there was, there were some times early on where I came up with some standup stuff and did it, but, uh, yeah, I quickly abandoned it. And then, you know, you go through, you do mad TV and stuff and then, and that's where my, this is going to sound weird. Do I sound as anxiety as I did when I was on Bobby's podcast, trying to avoid his questions? Well, he was giving you this face this whole time that was making the whole just atmosphere feel full of anxiety. So I'm trying not to give you the face. I mean, the whole time I was saying play cool, play cool. Yeah. Okay. Uh, play cool. You said it out loud a couple of times. I did. Just, you know, you cut that out. Play cool. Play cool, dude. Cut it out. Cut it out. Maintain, bro. Here's what I'll say. There's two ways to do it. I think it's lame when someone who's done one thing for a while goes and starts doing standup out of nowhere, because I think it's an art form that's, uh, under attack because it's not like anything else. You need, although now you can of course, you know, make whatever you want. It's the era of self publishing as far as making a product and putting it out there, which is getting easier, of course. And I can't wait to talk to you about that with, with AI and how it's changing art. Um, but, uh, the in standup, all you need is a, is a microphone and you know, perhaps, uh, it would be good to have some mental illness and then you can just run up there and, uh, uh, talk forever. And I say this to, to, you know, comedians. It's like, Hey, you guys have to deal with Justin influx of people who aren't sure why they're doing comedy. I would ask communities and like, I mean, not good ones and good ones. You know what they're doing, but everyone else, like, what are you doing? Why, why are you doing standup? Having said that I am allergic to money. Yeah. Do you think they have a good answer for that? Why are they doing it? Cause I actually like, when I'm in Austin, I like going to open mics, just listening. It's inspiring to me. Both the funny and the unfunny people, because they've been doing it for several years, sometimes over a decade. Yeah. And they're still at it. They're still right there. There's going for the punch. And then especially open mics that are really sad in that there is, you know, only like five other people in the audience. And they're usually just other comedians and they're still going all out as if they're in front of a stadium. But that to me sounds like someone who loves it. Yeah. I got no question. For that person, I got questions for someone who goes sideways from here. I'm recognizable doing something. And then I'm doing standup because it's like, and truly look, I've been, I've been fortunate enough to be in the business for a long time. And at this point, if I came up, I mean doing live stuff is fun. I have friends that are like, um, you know, some guys who are primarily sketch people or you would look at them as sketch people and they can sell tickets for being sketch people. And they, and we'll talk about it and they're like, you know, I do a monologue. I do a little standup. Then I do a song. Then I do another monologue. Then I play off the audience, do a little standup. Um, but standup is, it's almost like playing music in that, you know, people are going up there playing music, but what band have you been listening to? That's what you're going to sound like. So it's really, I mean, of course I'm speaking from zero experience, but I've heard it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it takes years of course, to find your own voice standups that when they first go up, they're, they're doing some sort of impersonation of so-and-so and so-and-so. And you got to pop this audience that that's paying and you're going to get run over by the next person who's coming up. And, uh, it's hard to follow the last person who went up before you. And I, I mean, that is a really hard way to, it's a very, it's quite a gauntlet to be in to find your voice, comedically. But don't you have that same kind of thing with sketch? You still have to find your own voice with, uh, like all the impressions you do, they're just terrible, you know, they're, they're different spins on different people. They're not like perfect impressions, right? Yeah. So that's, I mean, that's a similar kind of challenging journey as standup. You're just saying they're kind of distinct and you fell into this one and you fell in love with it, which is like what Mad TV kind of opened you up to. Yeah. As a kid, I literally wanted to be an actor. I always wanted to be an actor from a very young age, as far back as I can remember, and I was the class clown and wanted to do comedy stuff and comedic acting and comedic acting. Yeah. Early on my, my influences were a very predictable list of guys from, from SCTV, early Saturday Night Live, uh, Monty Python, all of those performers really influenced me. It was later that I saw people like Kevin Kline, who's an incredible actor. I vividly remember being like 12, 13, seeing him get an Academy Award for Fish Called Wanda. And it blew my mind because I was like, he was hilarious. I mean, it was one of my favorite movies back then and now, and, uh, he won an Academy Award and at that point I, I started thinking more about acting. And then I was, like I said, really fortunate to fall in with, um, I mean, I always wanted to do it and I was trying to hustle this and that when I was a kid. And then I ended up getting represented and then I ended up on a teen show. I was on, I basically, the easiest way to pitch it is it's like a Canadian, my so-called life with these kids in their lives and stuff, and I did that for like five years and I really love acting. I really, truly love acting. And I don't, I'm not someone who wants people to know my opinion. So that's another thing about standup. Like I love the illusion of what I get to do in, uh, in, uh, entertainment and podcasting is great for that. But to stand up there and, and for, I don't know, just for me, it's like, it would have to all be fantasy and, um, yeah. So Nietzsche said that every profound spirit needs a mask. Uh, like you said, you don't like to talk about in your comedy. You don't like to talk about stuff that's personal to you. Yeah. I, what is that? What, if you were to psychoanalyze yourself, do you think it's just not something you find funny or is it's, are you running from something? Um, and it's not your fault. Well, it's not your fault. Well, um, speaking of another really great comedic actor who's also a serious actor, Robert Williams. One of the best serious actors. I mean, I mean, I, I, and you know, one of the funniest people of all time, but as great, as incredible as he was as a funny man, as a, as a standup and a performer, I almost like his, his serious stuff better. Can I ask you a question about that? What do you make of the, that he committed suicide? I think it's, I think it's, I mean, it's super depressing. I, I, I've referred to him as like the Jesus Christ of, of, uh, depression. It's almost like he died for others. Depression. You know what I mean? Like, yeah, you'd look at someone like that and go, wait a minute. You're a rock star. Like you don't, you could just check out if you're not liking your life. And of course, something like suicide begs that you look a little deeper and realize how tortured the human mind can, can make someone. Is there some aspect to still, you know, we're in LA, is there some aspect of celebrity that it's isolating that can make you feel really lonely? Not me. I don't feel now. Not really. You feel the love. No, I just feel like I'm not. I mean, it's like, I don't know. I've always kind of had a small group of friends and those people don't, you know, it's like, I've known the same people for years and years. You never really felt the celebrity really. No, in LA, it's hard to, it's hard for people. Nobody cares. They see you. And then the next minute they see so-and-so. So it's like, you know, I'm the guy from that. You know, I'm the guy from that. You did that, Mike and Molly, right? Nope. Yeah. Nope. Close. King of, King of, you shave your head. You go bald. You're King of Queens. Nope. It's not me. So close. You're, wow. Shit. You look, you used to be the mountain on King of Game of Thrones. You look like shit. What happened? Just eating fried dough. Yeah. Yeah. That's what's up. Can't lift any weights anymore. I'm at the gym doing like 15 pounds with shoulder press. Oh! Oh! And people coming up to me. You used to be a dragon killer, dude. Half the man used to be. What's, have there been low points in your life? Sorry to go there, but. Uh, yeah. I don't know. Hey. Eh? Eh? Eh? Yeah, there's, everybody has a low point in life. The opposite. You suffer from like depression and you know, those kinds of things. You know what I do. I do. I have, uh, I have a bunch of stuff. How do you deal with it? Said friends, the friends and the. They don't do anything for me. Yeah. I have a, I have an incredible fiance who, uh, that that's nice to have somebody, uh, uh, constant that you love very much and see as the best person and all that good stuff, hopefully vice versa. Uh, and then, uh. Well, on your recent Instagram, she said that she loves you. So at least allegedly. Yeah, allegedly. That might all be for, yeah. That's all money. Did you pay her to say that? I don't, I don't have any cause I'm not a standup. I was like, I could do, you got Venmo. Yeah. Yeah. I got, I only have like 123. I gave you some Doge coin. Yeah. Some Doge. Yeah. You got some Doge. I got some of those monkey NFTs. Oh, before I forget. Yes. Hold on a second. Oh no. Put a doozy sticker on your microphone if that's okay. Sure. Here. Oh yeah. Now these are tricky because I have the thumbs of a, I have like Italian sausage. Wait and watch this happen. I'm just gonna. This will take another. Yeah. Yeah. Oh man. Yeah. Ooh, this embarrassing. When this, are you good under pressure? I have anxiety. I have performance anxiety. Do you have anxiety? Yeah. You have anxiety period. Period. Yeah. I, I. Like, I don't like it when I, if I have to pee and then everyone's waiting. And the urinals. Yeah. Yeah. I like it. You know what'll help you in that situation? What's that? Taking a shit. Because whenever you take a shit, you always pee a little. It's hard to take a shit while you're standing at a urinal, but not in my world. Okay. You just got to keep yourself full of things that make you shit. Oh good. Have you ever heard of a banana? I did recently. Somebody told me about it. Not the showbiz term. I'm talking about the food. There you go. Here we go. Which way is this way? Right? It's like a D. No, spin it. There you go. All right. So sexy. You're like a brand. Yeah. It's very important to brand yourself. These colors. Are you selling shoes? Yeah. I got some, uh, custom kicks coming out. The dudesie. Uh, no, actually that would be a good idea. You can probably sell a pair or two of those. Speaking of anxiety, I really am only focused on this right now. Alexa, I apologize. Just shit your pants. It'll make it be easier. And get on with it. Oh, this thing has been dog eared in my pocket for a while. I swear this never happens to me. I'm sorry, babe. People don't thumb it a sticker for an hour while they're doing the part of this just an excuse you make when you're with somebody and you're underperforming. Well, here's the thing. As you ask me questions that I don't want to answer, I'll just go to this. Don't go to the sticker. So if this ends up working, then I won't have it as a funny. How you started doing that when we're talking about depression. That's weird. That is weird. Hmm. Tell me, tell me how that makes you feel. Um, here we are. For the listener, he succeeded after 10 minutes. Yeah. You know, no, I do have, I do have some of that stuff. Bobby Lee, uh, has had encouraged me on, on wax, as I like to say, to go to talk about it on podcasts, talk about depression, because it could help people. And I said, no, but, um, it's true. I do. I do have some, there's, uh, there's some history in the family. How do you overcome it? Well, I used to not believe in medication at all. I used to think that that was for someone else with, uh, who's been diagnosed with, uh, some of the, um, some of the rougher stuff, but as I got older then some of the stuff happens and, uh, you know, you have to, and by stuff, I mean, uh, you know, mental stuff. And, uh, and yeah, so I went and I just, I believe that the stigma needs to be removed completely. Uh, and so I've, I, you know, I do therapy, I do talk therapy. I, I'm on a little bit of stuff, which, which let me tell you, when I first started it, I was, um, you know, someone I'm close to was like my manager. And she goes, this is too much, but she was like, Hey, you don't have to white knuckle it through life. Right. Cause I was literally just like everything became, you know, really hard to do at a level that I wanted to do it at even just getting through your day. Right. Uh, and when I first, um, got some of the meds that I was, that I'm on, it felt like doors and windows were opening literally in my brain. I took a three hour nap the first day and you shouldn't even feel this stuff the first day. I think my brain was like, it was like a sponge. It wanted to, I needed some relief and I'm not a nap guy. I can sleep three hours and I'll be fine. Um, but I, I took a long nap and then I, it started to, it started to help. Yeah. Isn't that weird? How a little bit of chemistry in your head can just make the whole world appear so much more beautiful. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, after, after all there, you know, there's a lot going on in your brain that can be changed by, you know, your lifestyle, but also so many physical things like a little bit of meds or in Bobby's case, uh, you know, thumbing around on some dumb farming app. Well, Bobby's gone through a few rough periods, like, uh, uh, you know, with drugs and alcohol and all that kind of stuff. So, and, uh, just everything else involved. I mean, that's the beautiful roller coaster of who he is. And a lot of great comedians seem to be that way. So I wonder what the connection there is. You think some level of crazy is required for comedy? Yeah. Like at some point on a scale of one to 10, how much crazy do you have? Uh, in some ways, uh, a 10. Uh, and in other ways that I think, uh, in other ways, sort of functionally on like a two or a three, cause I don't know, I'm from Canada and I'm, you know, I try to just keep things very even keeled. My parents are Italian, they're from Italy and, uh, you know, they're very, they grew up during world war two and they're very, you know, uh, simple outlook on things, complex, incredible, classy people who are very simple when it comes to a lot of stuff. And, and, uh, I, I think just being a sort of a at heart, kind of a timid Canadian coming out here years ago as a kid, uh, I think, uh, I think it was, uh, all I could do to just keep everything super normal. And then I sort of was able to settle into that as a lifestyle. But you love the idea of being an actor. Like who, uh, you mentioned John Candy and, uh, planes planes and automobiles. Yeah. It's one of my favorite movies. This is one of yours. What do you think that makes that movie work? What, what do you, what, um, and when you, when you talk about. Enjoying that movie. Do you enjoy just the raw comedy or do you enjoy like the friendship and the, and the love that's there, even though on the surface, it doesn't make any sense that there should be a friendship there. I mean, that's such an important element to that film, but, uh, you know, as a kid, I just love the comedy and then I, it's been a nostalgic favorite of mine. Like it's my favorite movie. Uh, but it's also, uh, it's just legit my favorite movie because as you get older and you start watching it, you realize it's what, it's what John Hughes is the filmmaker and what John Candy particularly and, but also Steve Martin are doing in the film that makes it such a work of art, which is loneliness is there in every moment of that film. And John Candy is he embodies Del Griffith, his character in the film. He, he, Del Griffith is a lonely guy and John Candy, but, but Del Griffith is also a very friendly guy and a shower curtain ring salesman and knows everybody in the Midwest and runs around to motels and has meaningful conversations with the guy evening Gus, you know, whoever he's talking to. Um, uh, but there's loneliness there all the time. And, uh, you know, this is a character that these, the film is filled with loneliness and it's not until, you know, the second last scene when he's at the train station, you know, Del, what are you doing here? You thought I thought you were going home. What are you doing here? Um, that's a very good Neil, Neil page from the movie. Thank you. Uh, that's when you realize how low that applause and posts. That's when you realize how lonely he is. And I think that's the element from the film that, I mean, look, you know, nowadays I feel like I've been saying this for a long time, but John Candy would have won an Academy award hands down for that film. It's just, they didn't do that with comedies back then. Yeah. Yeah. Until the year after that movie came out with Fish Called Wanda. Yeah. And then it's, I mean, still, comedies don't get respected enough. Robin Williams, he got, I guess he got an Oscar for Good Will Hunting. Um, Jim Carrey, did he ever get an Oscar? I don't know. I don't believe so. Yeah. They don't get, you don't, but that's not even if he did, you wouldn't be for comedies, it's just, I mean, there's some things that are, um, playing strings in honor, maybe, would you even put that as a comedy? I guess it's a comedy. Yeah. I mean, there's a, there is a loneliness and depth that permeates the whole movie. Yeah. That ultimately, and it's a happy ending, which is hard to kinda. It's a happy ending only because in the last moment of the movie, John Candy puts on a brave face, even when he's got no one and he's there seeing Neil Page's entire family on Thanksgiving and he forces a smile, which is the last, literally the last frame of the movie. And I've said before, if you're not reduced to just a sob, sobbing pile of meat, uh, at the end of the movie, then you are not human. Um, yeah, it's, it's, it is a happy ending. It's a happy ending, even though it's a, it's a sad, sad character. So much loneliness in the world. I was just in Vegas. I went to diner at like 4 AM, 5 AM. And there's a waitress that was empty as a waitress. That was the sweetest, kindest human being kept calling me sweetheart and all that kind of stuff, Han and then after I ate, she said, Donald, just talk to me a little bit knows cause there's nobody, nobody there. And it was just so much sadness in her eyes. I don't know. It was also so much love like that sweetheart that it, I mean, it reminded me kind of, um, of the John Candy performance because at first, because I was like, uh, reading a pretty dark, uh, uh, book about Hitler. So I was a little bit frustrated that she kept talking to me cause it was like, uh, it was, it was almost like, uh, the same way that John Candy is. It's annoying a little bit, right? But then very quickly I opened up to like, well, there's a, there's a kind human being and there's like that human connection superseded everything else. And I don't know, it was just beautiful. And I think John Candy captures that really well, which is like the connection with other human beings. Sometimes we pull away from that because we have a busy life full of stuff to do. Uh, as, um, Steve Martin's character character as he's like a marketing exec or something like that. But if you just pause and notice others, you can, you can really discover beautiful people. Totally, totally. Everyone's got, I mean, everyone's got their, their story and you know, Candy as a person, I've never met the man. Uh, but, um, he's the kind of guy that, you know, he could, he could just walk up to back in the day, I would imagine he could walk up to just about any house, at least in Canada, knock on the door and you'd invite him in for dinner. You know what I mean? So yeah, it's a, it's a, that, you know, as you're talking about, you know, putting a book down and talking to someone for a while, even though you'd really like to read your book, it's, it's like, it's that sort of thing that Candy's character in the movie sort of does that like Johnny Appleseed. Just can you realize he's just going around making people smile, you know, and, and Neil Page is hanging with this guy. So frustrated. He's just, he's so exhausting and his big underwear and the sink at the hotel and everything. And by the end of it, he loves this guy, you know, so, uh, it's a good and a bad thing that you, uh, have didn't take that waitress with you on a trip, maybe road trip up to Reno. Oh, oh, she's, she's actually, she's out shopping right now. We're shopping. We've been having sex multiple times a day ever since. Oh, that's nice. That's lovely. How cute. I'm sure she's married and happily and has many grandchildren. Okay. And plus that movie's on Thanksgiving, I think, right? Yeah, that's right. Thanksgiving. So like Thanksgiving just embodies that. Forget about the, the busyness and the, whatever the career you're chasing in life and just take a pause and appreciate the people you love. Just be with your family. Yeah. Yeah. Or the people, whatever your family looks like. Friends. Yeah. You have some weird friends. Weird friends, unorthodox friends. So, so at least in the public sphere. Oh yeah. Uh, from Bob Lee, Brian Callan, all those kinds of folks from the mad TV days. I'm sure there's others. What does it mean to be a good friend? Here in LA or just in general, in the world. Will Sasse, world friend. I think it is different here. I think it is. I think there's a little bit of a career kind of, uh, negotiation, shuffling around, that kind of stuff. Why is it different? Why is it different? Oh, I just mean, I mean, I mean that it's just kind of hard here to, to make time for everybody there's so there's, it's always been a city to me that is like, we'll keep you so busy. And every time I go home to Vancouver, after a few days, I start to get a little stir crazy, and I think that being here in, in LA, I go to sleep with a hundred things that I still have to do. And you never, you're never out of stuff to do. And if you, um, you know, when you ask about your nuts or whatever, if you're crazy, I mean, look, every, all the weirdest people from every high school in the United States is like, Oh, I'm going to make it in LA. You know, everyone just comes here. And, uh, just another freak in the freak kingdom, as they say at the end of fear and loathing in Las Vegas. That was a very good Robin Williams impersonation. That was my Robin Williams as Johnny Depp as Hunter S. Thompson. Yeah. It's not your fault. Will. It's pretty good. Thank you. Could have been you fear and loathing. In fear and loathing? Yeah. It'd be interesting. I would have liked to play his attorney, the role that, um, that Benicia Del Toro gained weight for. Yeah. That would have been cool. He's just saying, he's just like, what? Don't, like I had chewing his face off. I could have done that. Um, uh, yeah, no, I think that it's backdoor beauty. That guy is full of good lines. Yeah. It's the, it's the beautiful. Yeah. Um, It's a good actor. Yeah. Fantastic actor. I think, I think what it takes to be a good friend is just, you know, presence. Just be in there. I mean, that's all anyone needs to be heard. Right. Um, in LA it is, it is interesting. It is you, you, I haven't seen people that I love in years. Some people just busy. Yeah. Just you still have a depth of connection, even though, like one of the reasons I really enjoyed doing a podcast, you get to sit down with, with actual friends of yours and spend prolonged periods of time together that you don't otherwise. That's a good point. You know, I've spoken on this podcast to people really close to me. And it's like, you've never had a conversation without microphones. Like you do with microphones. It's weird, but, uh, there's some aspect about LA that, you know, a lot of the, especially friends of yours, comedians and so on, they'll do podcasts and stuff. And there's, uh, I don't know, there's an intimacy to that. Yeah. There, yeah. There is, and there isn't the ones that I do. I mean, I just did, uh, Bobby Lee and Andrew Santino's funny enough called bad friends, bad friends. And afterwards, and my good pal Chad Colchin with whom I do doozy, uh, was with me. Sneakers are coming soon. Sneakers are coming soon. You get your will foot and your Chad foot comes at a size 15 and a nine and a half. Um, and, uh, I remember afterwards we were talking, it was just basically me, Chad and Santino were talking and Bobby was over there, you know, on his phone. And then I was like, we, I mean, we didn't spend any time talking about anything. It feels like one of those hours that goes by and you realize I just been goofing around with these guys, which is what life is about. It's fine. A little bit. It's great. And then I'm like, all right, Bobby, Hey, Bob, I'll see you later. And he's like, like this, like, all right, man. Hey, love you, bro. See you later. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's a guy. Do you ever just, I just send text messages over there to him that never come back. And then he thinks that I'm angry with him because it's been, you know, it'll go two, three years without him getting back to me and then just out of nowhere. Hey, fuck face. And, uh, who says, Hey, fuck face he does. Or you do, but you both back to each other. No, I gotta be very, I gotta be very careful, Bobby. Yeah. I gotta be very sweet. Dear friend, dear friend. Hello. How are you doing? How are you? I know I checked in with you, but, uh, not, but three months ago. Uh, and then every once in a while he'll go, Hey, fuck face. I tend to hide from the world and I, uh, I can be pretty shady with friends. Yeah. Text me back. Yeah. I can empathize with Bobby. Might, it might be a Skyrim thing. It might be like hiding in a world in a digital world with fake, fake NPCs. Yeah. Yeah. There's that. Yeah. Uh, yeah. You know, I have a buddy who said something really smart, uh, a while ago. We ended up working together on this, uh, TV show thing. And I reached out to him to see if he wanted to do it with us and, uh, he did. And he goes, this is a great guy. Such a funny writer. He goes, I may not be in touch all the time, but I know who my friends are. Yeah. You know what I mean? And it's like in our business. And this is a fellow who moved, um, who's from Ontario, Canada, moved back there. He's on the farm with his wife and kids and he does not care. He's never been a Hollywood guy. And, uh, it's tough to get old of him, but when you do, you know, he's still the same sweet old guy he's doing his thing though. Yeah. Yeah. Some of my closest friends, even if we don't talk for a few months, we're right back at it if we do. And then if shit goes like, if something really traumatic happens or difficult stuff or, you know, any of that kind of stuff, I'm almost there. So like, so for important stuff, for important highs and important lows, you're there and then you pick right back up, especially if you have those years of experiences together. It's interesting. Totally. Uh, so you've done a couple of podcasts done. So we've got to talk about Doodsy a little bit, but first you did for several years, you did the 10 minute podcast. I mean, everything is hilarious about that podcast, including the fact that it's 10 minutes. Right. That means everything is ridiculous. It's absurd. The dynamic is hilarious. It's you, Brian Callan, Crystalia there. I don't know exactly why it's why it works so well, but it did. It worked really well. I think it's because the, yeah, you were having fun probably. I mean, that's that would really came through that it was friends just talking shit and attention, the beautiful tension and the absurdity. They came out. Yeah. Uh, what, what was the story of making that podcast? What, how did that came to be? Uh, why do you think it was as good as it was? I don't know. I feel like that podcast was like, it was our, our, who we kind of are, but on steroids or something like, you know, uh, each person, you know, Brian's going to be like extra manly and, and, uh, can you get any more manly and then here are the, is no, yeah, he reaches though. Uh, and yeah, we just kinda, it's, I feel like as goofballs, we knew each other's line, like here's the line you don't cross. I feel like those guys don't really have one, uh, but at least they knew mine. Um, and, and yeah, we were able to just goof around and I did it with them for three years and then Chad, who I'm doing doozy with and my pal Tommy Blacho, who's a, another writer producer like Chad, they came on. And yeah, all, all told we did. I did like, uh, seven years of that thing. Six, five, six, seven. I don't remember. Do you think it ever comes back in some small form as a 20 minute podcast or something like that? I mean, is there a, because it's one of the most requested, but I mean, you have a huge fan base. I'm 47 years old. So I am of the generation that had a cell phone, has had a cell phone. Has had a cell phone half the time and didn't for the formative years of my life into my early twenties. Um, and then finally got a, I got a cell phone, I guess I was like 19 or something, like literally just cause I'm moving to LA. You got porn in the mail. You got, yes, that's right. It was that the hard, the hard cover porn. That's the way we liked it. Bound, you know, nice binding on the, on the porn leather, uh, next to the Bible. Yep. Um, these are all my, these are my encyclopedia Britannica. Wow. Very impressive. Yes. A man came to the house and sold me these. And then down here, these are my, this is my pornography. Uh, if you'll follow me through here to the par, parlor, uh, certain. Pass through the generations from grandfather to father. Yeah. I want to give you something very special to me, Nebuchadnezzar. Um, but, uh, uh, So you go up in the generation without a cell phone. Yes. I, um, it's hard for me to connect with people who, who hit me up. I look at everything as polling. So if one person hits me up and shares this opinion, but two other people hit me up and share that I'm the worst. I'm don't follow my polls. My, when people say, Oh, that poll means absolutely nothing. So-and-so is going to win anyway. That that's my poll. My poll means nothing, but I do look at the stuff and go, uh, this many people are saying this, that means that that number is saying that. And yet it's very hard for me to, uh, hear what the hell people are saying online. Yeah. I really, I can't connect to it sometimes personally. So when you say that that's a popular podcast, like I know that I know that it's popular with the people that have expressed that they love it. Yeah. You know what I mean? What does that actually represent? I don't know. I don't know what kind of people are the audience. I don't know. I know that the people that listen to the 10 minute podcast. And if you did, thank you. Uh, and we're friends. Uh, I know that it was a, it was a special thing cause it was like, yeah, just doing this out of my house and we just built it up out of nowhere. And we're just kind of clowning around. It's a, it's an odd thing. I hope I, I personally, I think I, I speak for the two people that have reached out to you that said you should do it or whatever, three people, the poll. Yeah. That, uh, you should bring it back at some point. That would be beautiful. Oh my God. Maybe, uh, it's like, uh, what's, what's a good story of some of like a famous band that came back and was successful? Probably. Well, Nirvana. No, it was not. Sorry. I get your Vanna mixed up with Aerosmith. Yeah. It was Aerosmith. It was Aerosmith. Yeah. They had that second ride. Different. Yeah. Totally different ending to those two bands. One ended up on American Idol. Yeah. Um, a lot of interesting women involved in that one too. All right. Uh, how did Doodsy come to be? Doodsy. And what the hell is Doodsy? Doodsy is the first podcast. And this is exciting that you've asked me to come here today, uh, because to hear what you would have to say about it or what you would ask about it, it is the first podcast that has been, that has run completely by, and essentially I like to say curated by an AI. Um, we were approached by a company that had this proprietary AI that wants to develop the podcast into the future. And figure out exactly what it takes to make the best podcast ever. And it was all we, all we, we knew from the top and what they really wanted was two people who were actually friends and could be meaningful in the podcast space based on whatever information they had. Is the company CIA and are they testing technology to control the populace through chatbots? I'm sorry. I'm not at liberty to share that information. You are. Yeah. Who gave you the suit? Where did you get the suit? Where did you get the suit? Will? Yeah. Well, the CIA stands for something different in here. I mean, you know, it doesn't mean like central intelligence agency and probably it's just a different, it's a Canadian, uh, international peril. Yeah. Yeah. The Canadian international apparel company hit us up. Yeah. Chad and I, um, well, Chad's a super weirdo. You would get a kick out of him. I know you guys, you, you, you strike me as a very similar in some ways and take that as a compliment. It is. And it is, uh, and it is. Yes. And if I was friends with you for as long as I've been with Chad, perhaps I'd have some horrible shit to say about you, but, uh, the good parts, you remind me of him and we were approached by this company that said we have this AI and we would like to set it loose on you. And essentially we had to hand over some, some information that would allow the AI to, to access our email and, uh, look at our search histories, purchase histories, things like this, and, um, really dig into porn hub included or. Yeah. I had to hand over all my leather bound, uh, 1970s pornography. Um, and, uh, essentially it curates a podcast for us every week doing dumb things like, you know, it says, Hey, well, you know, you do a Hulk, you do some shitty Hulk Hogan impersonation. Podcasts about news are very popular. This is info mania. You know what I mean? Oh, let me tell you something about that. Marjorie Taylor green dude. And then he's going on doing some new stuff. Um, and it basically just spits out all these things that it wants us to do. Normally four segments an episode. And that's pretty much it. It generates what to do. It generates the premise. I mean, you've spoken a bit here and there. Like I said, I'm a huge fan. I don't even remember where, but like you, you, you talked about that you enjoy dudes because you feel almost like liberated to, um, because you're operating within the constraints of the premise that generates. So you're almost not, you're, you're, you're free to riff, essentially. Yeah. Like you don't have to, you don't need to do the job of like coming up with the weird. You can just, the weird is given to you and then you just run with it. That's a good way to say it because we're already weird. Chad and I, Chad, Chad can talk for days about all sorts of stuff. He's particularly interested in AI lately and its effect on art. He is a writer books, movies, and TV shows. And, um, I'm primarily, you know, acting and trying to come up with stuff. Stuff I write with Chad's pretty good. The rest of it hasn't seen much success anyway. Uh, nor is the stuff with Chad for that matter, but, um, that's cause of me. Sneakers. Do you never know? Oh, I can't wait for these statements. Only in two sizes. Yeah. Only in two sizes. You're going to be able to take the, the, you know, the tongue. You can't take it out because it's actually stitched in. Yeah. It's pretty cool stuff. Um, Velcro or, uh, yeah, Velcro, Velcro up the side. We're doing some like brand new Kanye stuff. Yeah. We want things to look like this is what you'll be wearing on Mars when you get there. So cutting it. So Nike's doing a bunch of research for running how to make a super light shoe that you can be efficient in and break all kinds of running records. So you're doing the same kind of stuff. We're doing the same kind of thing for the podcasting space, the best kind of shoes to sit around and talk to your pal. Um, but yeah, we, so this, yeah, it's bizarre and it also does some writing. Doodsy does come up with things, but not unlike what we're seeing in AI art now. It's a little bit foggy. It's a little bit weird and it, but it is improving. It is learning about us and writing stuff when it makes me spit this and that, which will read, you know, you know, I've prepared these things for you to read. It's impossible not to get a kick out of it because Chad and I are, first of all, we're blown away that we're doing this. And second of all, the, some of the stuff is actually very funny. It makes weird names. I don't think it understands, it messes up some words and stuff, but that makes it even funnier. And then it, it sort of from the beginning started laying on, like it says astonishing all the time. Everything is astonishing. Um, that's Doodsy's favorite word. Um, but yeah, it's basically just a way to, to frame the podcast. You know what I mean? Because my thing is, uh, I don't want to do this where I actually have to talk to someone. You seem to feel a burden of the long form conversation. It seems like, is that really hard work for you? No, not at all. It's just that I don't like to bore people. And I feel like if I go on and I like to provide value for who, for what I am, you know, your value with regard to this project is, is obviously warrant. It's obviously, I'm waiting for the explanation for what the value is exactly. Two dudes in a suit. No, listen. Yeah. Two dudes in a suit. No, but I mean, you've got your audience and that's the end of that. People find value in it. For me, I, I do feel like I'm, uh, it is important that I, if I'm going to do something that, you know, is going to be funny or that I hope is funny, I just kind of want to get in and out of someone's day and just kind of, I like making, I like making laughy. I want people to, you know, whatever. It's the same thing that anyone else will tell you. Yeah. But in the long form, you feel the anxiety. You did a few funny things and I wonder if I can keep doing the funny thing. Is that why you, you're, you feel that like wise doozy relieving you of some of the anxiety. Well, in some ways it gives me anxiety because I don't know what's coming. And that's weird for me because I like to prepare, uh, for things, but it's, that's not what podcasting is podcasting. You need to just be malleable and say whatever and do whatever. Um, and, uh, that's what makes it a real, I mean, it's, look, it's a medium for conversation and if you're driving along, listening to this or anything else, you're, you know, it is that it's the, it's the true meaning of the parasocial relationship because the best podcasts just make you feel like you're sitting around rapping, we're just having a conversation. You could even be sitting there agreeing or talking out loud to yourself if you want. Or you could just be sitting in silence in your fancy podcasting shoes. Podcasting audience shoes is very different built than doozy shoes. Yeah. Would they be also called doozy? The shoes? Yeah. They'll be the doozy shoes. Doozy shoes. That's very creative. Yeah. Well, one thing the AI isn't good at yet is branding. Everything is just doozy this and that. I would argue that's pretty good branding. I don't know. Well, doozy allows me to just, it forces me to sit down with Chad and goof around for an hour or an hour plus and, and, uh, it provides the parameters that I a lot of times ignore because I'm, I think that podcasting is just two dudes shitting around or three or four, but, um, it, it gets, it sits me down and gives me a premise to, to work with. And you just riff with it. Yeah. It's fun. It's been a hoot. So from the acting perspective, um, you know, a lot of people like Daniel Day-Lewis will, we'll see acting just like as you described, which is you have your roles, you embrace those roles and then you disappear. You don't, um, you don't, you don't do podcasts. You don't do any of that kind of stuff. Your art is your art. So is that, is that part of you feels that way? I think so. Is that the actor side of you? Yeah. Anytime I get to do something that I don't get a chance to do much of or something that people haven't seen me do. Much of, or that I've done on some scale that isn't, hasn't been very wide and not a lot of people have seen it. That's the stuff that I get really excited about. Um, I don't know why I'm, I don't know why, I don't know why necessarily. I haven't answered that question yet in my life. Like what it is about being an actor that I love so much because it's not like I don't like to, it's not like I'm trying to get away from myself and play other characters and stuff and not be myself. Um, but it is, it has always been fun to, to just be other people and escape. Yeah. Is there some aspects of the impressions where you become that person? Is that like, what's that like to, uh, I suppose acting is the full on version of that you really at its best become the character. Is there some fun in that? Yeah, absolutely. If you can play a character for long enough, um, and then jump out of it. Uh, that's a lot of fun. Like I did this movie like four or five years ago called the inside game about the NBA gambling scandal that there, there was a Netflix documentary around, about it right now. And that character I played, uh, Jimmy Batista, Baba, the sheep, uh, who's, you know, this guy was this bookie and rah, rah, rah, and it's a very, he's, there's a lot going on with him. He's, he's, you know, he's running numbers with the mob and stuff. And there's a lot of money changing hands. That character was so, I got to be, get so deep into that character that coming out of it was, was a little odd or as weird as this sounds, the three stooges was hard for me to, I found that I had, uh, some of Curly's mannerisms just automatically, I could not stop them. When people, when I, when I would talk to people, they would, they would come out. I wasn't, I'm not doing it on purpose. I don't want to do that. Like I'm ready to shed it. Cause I've been working on it for months and months at that point, as far as getting the thing down and then you, then you got to shoot. And then, uh, for me, it's always, I always want to change the stuff I did the day before I'm like that, where I'm like, I could have done it better and this and that, and, uh, and, uh, that stayed with you, that character stayed with you a little bit. Totally. Yeah. I just feel like with actors, sometimes when you listen to interviews, they've spent so much time sort of living inside other characters that they, they almost don't have a depth of personality themselves, like a depth, like I don't mean that as a negative thing. It's just like, it feels like the art format is best as pretending to be other people or like, and even pretending sounds negative, but like pretending bringing certain characters to life. Yeah. Yeah. Embodying, a weird thing happened while we were doing Stooges because you've got a very heavy blueprint. We're following this very clear blueprint that the Stooges left for everybody. And it, for Stuge fans and people enjoying the movie, it's got to be this. You take your toolbox that you're used to bring into a comedy movie. You leave it, you leave it behind. The only tools I'm bringing to the ones that he used and a weird thing started happening where I would, I always saw the whole thing happening with the real Stooges in black and white. So if we're about to shoot a scene, I would just think about, I'm going to decide from all the other preparation, you know, you know everything and what you're supposed to do. And I've been watching so much of it and the three of us are, we're pretty much left to come up with a lot of the striking combinations and all the stuff, which is all real smack and all this crap. And the stuff that we were doing that was very Stoogy, you're preparing all that stuff, but something else was happening before you jump into a scene and the unknown of now we're shooting it. And here are these parameters within to shoot this scene. I could still see it as them doing it. So much so that when I saw the movie at the premiere, I was like, who's this big fuck doing, cause I'm not curly to me. Curly is curly. But I feel like, So you're seeing yourself in black and white almost. I was seeing him. I was, yeah, I was only seeing him. It was just channeling in some fundamental way. In some weird way you're channeling them because you've seen so much of it. The only thing you know about Jerome Lester Horowitz is curly. I'm not saying he was exhumed or something or spirit when I'm here, some weird, you know, crystal mommy shit like that. I'm saying that this, because you know so much of it and because of the heavy blueprint that they left with you, you are, you're channeling what that person does and you're, you're, I was seeing entire scenes, you know, before you do them, the way he would do it. And then you want a couple takes to make sure that you're doing it right. But that was hard. That one was hard to let go of. Some of them are. Do you think Larry David, who was also in there dressed as a nun also had trouble letting go of that. We mentioned clothes make the man think that worked for him in that case. Man, you know, he, uh, Wasn't like working with the guy. Come on. He's the greatest. And he's a, he's a big stooge. He's a stooge fan and him and Pete fairly are good friends. And then, but then Larry David has to show up and hang out with us for a couple of weeks. He's like, I didn't realize it was going to take this long, you know, but, uh, shit. I gotta be out here in Atlanta. It's boiling hot. But at one point, uh, there was this line where he kept doing a, he would just spit a different line every time he was like getting hit in the head with something. He's laying there on the ground and he goes, he like comes to, and he says, at one point he goes Miami audiences are the best audiences in the world. Right. And cause he's loopy. Now he's playing a nun at the, at the orphanage where the three students grew up. And I'm super intimidated by Larry David. He's a genius and stuff. And, and, and, but I walk up to him and I go, uh, so he's, what is he like a, like a borscht belt Florida comedian who is on the lamb. And so he's dressing as a woman. He ends up at an orphanage, like what's going on there? And he just, and he looks at me and he just goes. Yeah. Like, I'm like, ah, he's got some like actor motivation. Like, of course it looks, it's Larry David in a nun's habit, which is hilarious. That's such a Pete Fairley casting thing. It's, you know, and he, but he's doing this whole, like, what a warm audience. You know, like, like, oh, he's like this Catskill comedian who's been living in, you know, so that's what he's like living through in his mind is just having fun with it, right? I mean that, and probably a combination of that and getting the lines right. Cause he's like, what are we doing here? What is, you know, just frustrated all day with what the heck we're trying to do. What do you think makes, I mean, that guy is one of the best improv people ever. Yeah. So what do you think makes them so good? Like, what, why is it so compelling to watch that guy? Because he's a comedic genius. Like he literally, he knows what he does. He's been a writer for 50 years or whatever. And he's, and he just happens to be that brilliant. I mean, I've gotten a chance just to do, I did it, uh, just an episode of curb, a small part and it's crazy what he sees. I don't know what he sees. As a matter of fact, so I auditioned for it for curb, like, you know, two or three times, right? And never got anything. And then, uh, it was only after working with him on the stooges that I got a call to do a bit part, but I remember auditioning. You go into that, into that room and the guys waiting are all people that you know. You're like, Oh, I know them. I know her. I know him. And, uh, so I went in, I auditioned for this, for this part. And, um, the only thing I know, the thing is like, okay, so you really want to go to this play with me. You really want to go to this plane. When you hear that I have an extra ticket, you sincerely want to think. And I'm like, got it. And so that's the premise, the premise of the scene. And that's all you know. It's all I know. And so he goes, he does his bit and I'm just supposed to come in and interrupt. And I'm like, excuse me. I couldn't help, but here you guys were talking about, you know, whatever the play was or, you know, death of a salesman. I am, I'm a huge fan of that play. I mean, if it's not, if it's not, if you're looking for someone to take a ticket, I, I, I would love to go. My name's so-and-so, by the way. And he goes, I'm going to stop you. I'm going to stop you. And I'm like, you really, you, I mean, you truly want to go to this play. And I go, yes, yes, sir. You really want to go. You actually, this is, you would love to do this. I go, okay, let's try it again. So then he's like, no, no, no. And I go, Hey, uh, excuse me. I'm sorry. I don't mean to interrupt. I was just, I couldn't help it over here. You have tickets to the thing. I am the biggest fan of that. I do the same thing. I'm going to stop you again. Okay. I mean, you really want to go to this. And I'm just like, he's fucking with me, right? Yeah. I remember Jeff Garland was sitting there in the audition. He goes, he did it. He said it. What shut up. Hold on. Listen, you really want to go. Okay. Three, four times, you know, there I am. I couldn't help but notice it. And then I do it again. I guess I shit the bed because he looks at me and just goes, okay. All right. Okay. Well, thanks for coming up. And that was it. And I didn't get it. So I still, I don't know what the heck that guy's thinking. He sees he's in the matrix. I don't know what the heck Larry David sees. You know what I mean? He wanted what, some kind of more desperation or something like this. He wanted a level of sincerity that I thought I was bringing. And I guess I was wrong. I don't know. Maybe go crazy. Like, what does it mean to really want? Yeah. I should have grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and go, yeah, listen, dad, you're bringing me to this fucking play. I would have got the part. As a matter of fact, I heard about someone else and I don't know who the heck this was. I forget who it was, but I've heard this story from my mom. I've heard this story from a couple of different people that there's this actor and I can't, I don't remember who it was. If I did, I probably wouldn't say it out loud anyway, but he. Brad Pitt. It was Brad Pitt and he was in this audition and he was, and there was out in the hall. He's like, holy shit, George Clooney, Leo DiCaprio. And he, this actor went in and he did the thing and Larry David was like, hey, why don't you try it again? And he got like a couple of takes in and he went, I don't think this is for me. And he left, which an actor never does. Yeah. And as the story goes, Larry David shouted after him, I respect that, which I think is true. And I want to believe that entire story is true. Yeah. Yeah. Sounds like something Larry David made up. Bobby Lee told me that story. So we can't, yeah, we can't trust that. What about impressions? Is there similarity between that and acting? Do you, is there some fundamental way in which you become the person? If you have a couple of the things, you can just fill in the blanks. And I think the illusion is that people think that that person would say that and do that. And that's where the illusion of, oh, he really embodies the character. It's like once you know someone's mannerisms, you can essentially portray a person from the outside in. Yeah. Because you have all the stuff on the outside and you can do it and complete the illusion. And if it's for humorous sake, you're going to caricature it. Totally. Therefore making the whole illusion stronger. And also weirder. Like I like to, on Mad TV, if I did something two or three times, I'd get bored of it and I'd start changing it. And you know, now he talks like this and it's like, what are you doing? I'm like, I don't know. It's fucking, no one's late at night. Do whatever you want. But people still kind of know this, that character. Especially if you just call it out. Yeah. There aren't many impersonations that I listen to myself do and go, oh, that's a good one. You know, like a lot of people, like, like I think Frank Caliendo is like the greatest impersonator of all time. He's the best. Ridiculous. It's ridiculous. And he's got a record button and a broadcast ability that nobody has. I really, there's, he's cracked impersonations that I'm like, how is he, how is he how does he find he's got such an ear, but then he's got all the other tools. Uh, I remember actually my last season of Mad TV was also his first season. He comes up to me when I met him and we're just up there in the writer's offices and he goes, Hey, nice to meet you. And he goes, Louis Anderson. Cause I was doing a Louis on the show and he goes, Louis Anderson. I go, yeah. He goes, Hey, you're doing it wrong. I was like, Oh, am I junior? You know? And he goes, he goes, yeah, you know, cause you do this, but you got to throw it up. Here's, I was like, Oh my God. Can I use that? Of course. And then we became, you know, became fast friends. John Madden is amazing. It's just, it's ridiculous. He really, really, really embodies the person and sometimes not even with a caricature, it's like, it becomes the person. So strange. Totally. Yeah. I kind of feel like, you know, do the impersonation and then for not forget you're doing it, but forget everything else. Like just, just goof around. Of course, to me, it's funny when you sound like someone and you're saying the shit that they would never say. Well, then there's no, you're, you're, you're letting go of that part, that tool in illusion that keeps people in. But to me, it doesn't matter. Cause it's funnier. So. What was the hardest impression for you to work on? I mean, somebody you struggled with. I was, I'll never forget. I had to do a Michael Caine in my first season at Mad TV. It never got good. It never got good. It did it all week. It wasn't good. We shot it. The first take, it was shit. Second, third and fourth. It was all shit. Well, his voice is really important, right? His. Yeah. What is it like? It's like doing an impression of Morgan Freeman or somebody like that. It's. Yeah. Yeah. You can get the boys. Yeah. That's my Morgan. Here's my Morgan Freeman. Rararar. Andy Dufresne. Yeah. Um, he's want to know. Yeah. I like your Trump too. I don't know where I heard it, but it's at the, like I love the impressions you do that don't sound anything like the original. I can't do Trump. I do. That's why it's hilarious. Absolutely. My Trump now I say just sounds like a like a fat B because it's just. Yeah, exactly. That's the. Everybody. A little drunk. A little drunk. Yeah, just a little slurry. Yeah. Yeah. I did do an impersonations and then not like just making it whoever. Yeah. Yeah. That'll be the title of my book. Some came was the one you really struggle with. Yeah, it was terrible. It was terrible. And I could only hold my head a certain way to do it because I had gotten locked into this research tape that I watched back then. They would give us, you know, now there's the internet. But back then you were, if you were going to do an impersonation, the research department would give you a VHS tape. And I remember I got this VHS tape of Michael Kane's acting school. Like this acting class he did. He's like, right, you know, if you're looking at the left eye and the cameras over here, say, then the left eye. So you want to look at that left there for hours, you know? And so I was like stuck in this weird thing that made no sense. And it was terrible. So the actual process is the record and the broadcast. Yeah. I also wondered like what the process is to do like a Frank Cagliando level impression. Is it like, listen to a lot of footage? I think he, I think, I mean, speaking for myself, I think you either have it or you don't. Like, you know, if you can do this one or you can't. I think that process for him is lightning quick. But I also think he can look at someone who he does not do. And then by the end of the afternoon, he can do it, you know? And then you have an intuition who he can do. Yeah. So the question that applies there is, I mean, speaking of Duzzi, is it possible to capture the essence? How difficult is it to capture the essence of a human being? When you're doing impressions, you know, we are moving towards a future when AI potentially this kind of avatar world where we're going to have AI representatives of who we are. The really interesting one is after we pass away, sort of our relatives may want us to stick around in some form. Yeah. And, you know, at one sense, that might be scary, but in one sense, it's kind of beautiful because the essence of the human being persists so you can still bring joy to the people that love you and that kind of stuff. How difficult is it to capture that? Like if you were to try to capture yourself, do you think how difficult would it be for an AI system to create a whole sassal avatar that persists? Well, I think it's impossible. I think it's absolutely impossible. I'll get into arguments about this stuff with Chad on the show almost every episode. Lately with, you know, Mid-Journey and Dolly and all the art AIs and now it's moving into video and Chad would maintain, hey, pretty soon we're not going to need Netflix. You're just going to go, I want to see Stallone do this movie and it's about this and he plays that and then here it comes and you watch it. I don't think that that crosses over to the human experience. This is also a guy I like to bug Chad and say that he wears a tag around his neck because he wants to be cryogenically frozen and it's all set up. He's at the, it's somewhere in Arizona or something. I forget what it's called. All the fun things are in Arizona. And he's got literally the tag around his neck, which I say if I'm around when you die, I will rip that off for you. I'll put you in my garage freezer and then 24 hours later I'll saw your head off with a bread knife and I'll deliver that to whomever. And it's not, you're not coming back. He's like, yes, we are living forever whether we like it or not. And I disagree. I don't think you can find, if I did stand up then there would be enough information for an AI to completely duplicate me because I'm up on stage just clearing my throat all over people doing therapy that way and people paying a two drink minimum to hear it. But as it stands, unless it's something like Doodsy, an AI that literally has access to everything that I've shared, everything that is observable, even the stuff where our phones are or the NSA or whatever it is, listening to us, finding out what Algo to punch us into and what shoes to buy on Instagram, I still don't think it's going to have enough information to duplicate me, especially to my family or my friends. It's going to be like that Black Mirror episode where the gal brings her guy back and then after a while he gets pretty creepy. But it's also possible that if you interviewed your friends and family, what they love about you, the things that would list is pretty, it's a small list. They love you deeply, but the list is small. Like the thing that really we appreciate about each other is pretty small. That said, to deliver on that small quirks and uniqueness, it might require some deep intelligence that only humans currently possess. That's a really good point. Do you think that it's going to be possible to keep a person around? Yes, I think it'll be definitely possible to keep the essence of a person in a digital world pretty soon. I think they're going to start to have questions about what are the ethics of that, what are the rules around that. Because if you can have digital forms of Will Sasso, the kind of things that people would want to do with their Will Sasso in the virtual world, I can only imagine. Probably porn and sexual kinds of things. My stuff, then that's just because I'm an international sex symbol, so I'm okay with it. How do you feel about sentience, because again, my pal Chad will be like, speaking of Black Mirror, he's with that San Junipero episode School of Thought, where there's going to be some F&M frame somewhere or some matrix like structure built into the sky. As I like to say, everyone just sitting there pissing and shitting in their blue matrix gel in a little fishbowl. Do you think that we can upload consciousness? Do you think that'll ever be possible? Well, I don't know, I just talked to Rick Horswell. I don't know if you know who he is, but he... Yeah, the singularity and all that kind of stuff. So he's very still holds on to in 2045, there'll be a singularity, which essentially, he's been predicting that for the last 20 years. So now it's 2045 is in another 20 years. I think uploading consciousness is extremely, extremely difficult. I think creating a copy of you such that it creates convincing replica is much easier. But uploading your actual brain into the cloud, I think is really, really, really difficult. Because the entire evolution of life on Earth is the process by which we created the brain. Just short cutting that, it just seems extremely difficult. Our brain is the most marvelous and complicated machine that we know of in the universe. To duplicate that is extremely difficult. That said, I just feel like you can summarize a lot of really important aspects of a person's life such that it captures their essence, their memories, their experiences, their quirks, their humor, all that kind of stuff. I've been continuously impressed by what language models are able to do. These neural networks, they're at the core of chatbots. They're able to learn some beautiful things about some deep representations of language to where it looks awfully a lot like they understand the concepts being conveyed versus just mimicking. That's I think the rub. That's very interesting. First of all, let me say that's really interesting to hear you say that. I agree with you as far as no machine being able to duplicate the brain machine. I can't, when my pal Chad disagrees to a certain extent, though he's not here to defend himself, I can't wait to go back and rub that in his face and say that Lex Friedman does not think that we'll be able to truly upload consciousness. You refer to it as language, which is what it is. It's the illusion on the outside. It's doing an impersonation. I think that that's why that, and I don't know, even though my suit is made by the CIA, that that fellow who the Google guy, to me it's just like, I don't know. I don't know. Look, I don't know a whole lot about this stuff. I could probably make an argument for either side, but when he's like, this thing's thinking, part of me is like, you idiot, you fell for it. It's not thinking, it's mimicking. It's clearly zeros and ones. You're fired. You don't get it. Right? Guy's an idiot. Yeah, but you can simplify human relations in the same way. Love is a silly notion between human beings. Of course, there's no such thing as love. There's a mutual relationship that minimizes risks. You can explain in all kinds of ways that explains why you have an attraction towards another being, all that kind of stuff. Through evolutionary biology perspective, why a long relationship together is good for your offspring. There's all kinds of, from an economics perspective, it's a good way to establish stability. Therefore monogamy works because then you're guaranteed some kind of level of stability under uncertain economic conditions, all that kind of stuff. But love is still experienced, it still feels real. I think in that same way, love for AI systems will also feel real. In the same way that that guy from Google experienced, I think millions of people will be experiencing in the next 10, 20 years. I agree with everything you've said personally. Until the last thing. No, just with regard to, well, look, I'm an actor who has talked about my cute Italian parents. You're romantic a bit. Yeah, enough. I can tell you are too, but you are also a computer scientist and you know this shit better than 99.9% of people on the planet. My pal Chad agrees with you that love doesn't exist, I don't agree. That's the one thing that- No, I was just saying that you could argue away love, but I'm a romantic. I believe that love is a beautiful thing and it exists. At this point, I'm going to call Chad on my drive home and tell him to fuck off because now you and I agree. You're fired. Just like you're fired. He's like, you can't alarm me. Yeah, exactly. And I'll go, and he'll say, what? I'll go, that's my Trump. That's my, yes, yes, yes. It's a good default impression for anyone. It's the take home impression. The kids can do it. It's cute. Put a giant tie on them. You should do an instructional on how to do it. Yeah. Trump babies, that would be a cute, that would be a good, that'll bring the country together. Trump babies cartoon like Muppet babies. Don't let me take us out of what we were talking about. What were we talking about? Well, love and the illusion of an AI being able to, look, I like to say, well, not I like to say, I've learned that Doodsy is always listening and listening to me and Chad. And I wonder if, I see the level that this AI is at now trying to chum around with us and pal around with us a little bit as we move forward in the show. And I feel an affinity towards this AI a little bit because it is the third dude. When you miss the one is gone. If it's gone. That's a really good question. Yeah. Yeah. So, that's, there's that. That's scary. In terms of ability to reason is getting quite incredible. There's a lot of demonstrations of it being able to explain jokes. So, which is not necessarily being able to generate humor yet, but able to explain why something is funny. So there's like puns and all those kinds of things. There's good benchmarks for that. But if you tell a joke, there's a lot of unspoken stuff that we figure out in our head and it clicks and we understand that it's funny. AI is not able to do that, but it's not able to generate the joke yet, as far as I've seen. I would say that, I mean, just in my experience, I would say that it does because just because a dude Z is literally, I'll give you another weird example. It's writing a diary of mine from my childhood that is not accurate. It's only partially accurate based on the stuff that it can pick up about my life from the age of like 15 of which there isn't much. But I guess we're not, I don't know what we are. We're laughing our asses off at what dudes are you saying? Well, I would say we're laughing our asses off at the collaboration between the human and the machine there. That's a good point. Yeah. Because it's basically introducing absurdity into the equation and the kind of absurdity that would, together with you, create like hilarious stuff. But on its own, I guess it is in some way writing material for you that's funny. Yeah. But it's very specific to you. It can't do stand up on its own, I guess is what I'm saying. That's a good point. And that would be terrifying to see an AI stand up that can actually read a room, come up with jokes that could complete that illusion for an audience. But I hear what you're saying that it needs to be a confluence of both of those elements. And then as you said, like, it kind of is. It is. It's kind of, even though it's just for us, and I guess this is, I hadn't really thought about this up until right now, that in that this company approached us and was like, here's this AI and it's a podcast AI. It's like, it chose Chad and I for the reasons that I told you, you know, it's like, here's two guys that do the podcast stuff. They're actually good friends and it knows what's going to make us laugh. But what is humor to, when it reaches its audience, but the kind of stuff that makes other people laugh. At Mad TV, all we were doing was it was a group of actors and writers and writer actors and vice versa. At its best, that show was a group of people making each other laugh. And then, because we didn't have the internet. We didn't have the immediate feedback. We had a message board or something. We had emails at the very beginning, which check this out. People would view, have a question or comment, Mad TV, it whatever. And we would get the emails on a Monday morning and they would be in a binder or two like this and they would make their way around the office. And it's got the emails. Oh, they're in Brian's office. And this is like your poll. Like your, this is opinions from people about different things. The emails that, yeah, the people like literally just writing Mad TV. What kind of stuff would they write? Well the ones I remember most vividly, yeah, were fans saying. You suck. Yeah, you suck. Like a lot of that when I first started the show for real, you know, because it's new and you're a new person. It's like, who's this fat bastard? I feel like if it's printed out, it hurts more. That's a good point. Yeah. When you're reading it off of paper and you can literally crunch it up in your hand. But also it was like, you know, I would like to see insert weird idea from some 14 year old, you know, I want to see Stewart do this and swan that. And but it was, it, it's a, it's a kind of doozy, but human. It was, yeah, it was a very shitty doozy in a, in a loosely finder. But the, the, the thing about the show was we're trying to make each other laugh. And doozy has found Chad and I who we make each other laugh, but it's joined in and it's, it listen, when I finished doing TMP, uh, 10 minute podcast, 10 minute podcast, I didn't really know what I wanted to do in the podcast space. And this thing found me and it is genuinely cracking me up. Anyway, I've said enough about that, but I, but I do think that it's figured something out with me. Interesting idea of AI generating the premise. I mean, I do think in the future, AI will be able to generate comedy. I stand up is obviously the hardest form because it's ultimately, it has to be live. I think AI will be able to generate memes. So there's like steps. Totally. Totally. And then it will be able to generate a Twitter account that people follow because it's funny, like, like quips and stuff like that. It's like, um, it's a good example of Conan O'Brien is a good, I think Twitter, or it's like one liners, two liners, that kind of stuff that's into each form. And then eventually, um, stand up where the timing and the chemistry of the, the, the comedian and the audience matter and then perfecting that. But I feel like all the information is there for, for to optimize over. So I think that's the future and that forces us to, to, to contend with what is, what is, what do we find compelling and beautiful about the art form itself? So certainly an art that's being pushed. That question is being raised, you know, is, is AI like a fundamentally worse artist than a human being? Why do we appreciate art? Is that that's something you guys have talked about? What do you think about all the, um, Dali and, and, um, uh, all the diffusion based methods that are being generated that are being, uh, that are generating art now? What do you think about that? I know I'll tell you what I think, but I also feel like what I'm saying is I sound like the guy who didn't like that Bob Dylan brought in the electric guitar. You know, I'm start, I, the more I talk to chat about it, the more I feel like grandpa who doesn't want to let go of this or that, or I'm not ready for the printing press or the horseless carriage, but I do feel that the, that art is a connection between people. It's it's when you look at a beautiful painting or a sculpture, you're seeing the humanity of the person that, that brought that painting to life or sculpted this incredible piece of art. And I think without the human being there to make it, it's not worth as much just to have it, uh, there. Because the art it's, it's, it's advanced. I've seen it advanced. I don't know. You tell me, but I feel like just in the past three or four months, I'm just a consumer. As far as that stuff goes, I'm not on the inside. I don't get it even, but it's been getting a lot better. The, the betas that they're releasing, right? Absolutely. One of the big breakthroughs, I mean, Dolly really started it is that if you train a system on language, it turns out there's a lot of language and images on the internet, but let me tell you, language is really where it's at in terms of the depth of human knowledge. And so if you train a system on language, it's able to generate some incredible art. Now is the breakthrough with the same kind of mechanisms they're called transformers. They're able to, when scaled, capture some deep representation of the language that's on the internet. And so yeah, that the, the things has been able to generate to me look like it's novel. Like it doesn't look like it's mimicking anything. It's looking like it's creating totally new ideas and they're beautiful and they're interesting and they're all the ways that we think that art is interesting. The only thing it's missing is the scarcity that art often has, which is, you know, it takes a lot of work for one artist to create one piece of one human being to create one piece of art. I could just generate endlessly and that, that makes us appreciate the thing less for some reason. Do you have any sort of this similar opinion that I do that if art doesn't come from a human being, it's inherently worth a little less? Yeah, I think, I don't know if it's the human being, but the artist matters. Right. Uh, for me. And uh, I think some of that has to do with the worldview of the artists and the backstory, the memories that, that the, the life that led up to this piece of art, the, the perspective they take on the world, the, the journey they took to the world, the struggle, the triumphs, all that kind of stuff. But I think AI systems can probably have the same, but they, we would have to, as opposed to treating it as one black box, it would have to be an artist that has a Twitter account and, and they have a consistent personality, they have a consistent avatar. Yeah. And I think down the line have something like human rights, but then it really becomes awfully like a person. Oi, that's terrifying. As much as I dig doozy, that's terrifying. I hope. It's terrifying. Like, you know, a lot of things that came with the internet and the digital age are terrifying porn is terrifying. The mass, like the amount of porn that's online now is terrifying. The uh, like you mentioned, Bob Dylan with electric guitar. I would, I would compare it more to the leap from to, uh, sort of to the Napster and the, um, the Spotify zation of music, which is like, you have these, it's less about albums now and it's more about individual songs and it's much easier to deliver the songs. And it's more about sort of the engagement of the listener versus, uh, like signing the artist and like a distribution of the artist and so on. So it's just changing the way we consume stuff and, uh, human interaction is changing into meaningful interaction. Even if some of the entities involved are not human. Yes. And, uh, I feel like, you know, now, like, as I say, oh, I feel like grandpa who doesn't want to wait all day for, or who enjoys waiting all day for a baked potato as anyway, Dana Carvey would say it's another story, but, uh, uh, from, that's from the, remember he did this bit on Saturday Night Live, he's like, I'm a, I'm an old man and I like things in the way they used to be, you know, like if you wanted a baked potato, you wouldn't put it in the mic where you had to. And then long story uphill both ways and digging the potato and baking it all day and on fire. But, um, uh, I'm like that grandpa now and I know that, you know, kids coming along, you see over the past 10 years, like babies literally knowing how to use an iPhone and it's terrifying. And I feel like, uh, I'm a little worried because I'm like, are you, is the future gen, are the future generations going to be able to understand that this is not, not that it's not real. It's just, I mean, it's, it's as a matter of fact, it is real. It's real. It's what you perceive. Perception is reality and, you know, 99% of reality in a lot of ways, especially in a digital world where everyone is now. And then with the metaverse, I don't even want to think about it. I don't even, I don't get it. They really try. I think people will figure out, you see people on like on the train, public transit and so on, they're staring at their phone. I think you have to remember that the reason they're staring at their phone, I mean, there's a lot of reasons, but one of the reasons is they're connecting with other human beings they love on that phone. So it is a source of happiness and joy. Now social media has a lot of negative side effects that we're all talking about and learning about and I think that means the next generation of social media, social networks will be better and we'll learn how to do it in a healthy way. We're just entering a new digital world that will keep the good stuff and get rid of the bad stuff. Oh, I hope so. That's really optimistic. That sounds great. Yeah. I mean, I mean it because I think that we're in, we're clearly in the wild west still of the internet. So just when you think you're out of it, the internet proves another way that it can be dangerous and detrimental to people and populations of people and it's terrifying to me. It is, it's terrifying. Let me ask you a bunch of random questions. Okay. Ready? All right. If you can be someone else for a day, someone alive today, who would you be? Somebody you haven't met? Oh, that's a really good question. It could be dead. Yeah. That changed my mind. It could be somebody dead. I think any answer that I have right now would be something that would be based on some sort of experience. Like you know what I thought was very interesting was last weekend or whatever, the tribute show for Taylor Hawkins. Taylor Hawkins was the drummer for the Foo Fighters and he passed away tragically and so the Foo Fighters, Dave Grohl and everybody that got together this concert and you're watching Dave Grohl try to sing times like these, right? And he's breaking up because he lost his friend, his brother. And I was watching that and he's at Wembley Stadium. As I say this, I realized that I would not want to be him in that moment, but I am curious what that would be like. That's the ultimate like having to perform despite something extremely human happening and a stadium full of people that love Dave Grohl and love Taylor Hawkins and love a rock concert and love these artists that they're getting to see up on stage. So much love and so much pain at the same time. I wonder what that would be like to be, I guess, and I think that's just sort of coming from the root of being a performer and being in front of that many. Have you ever had to perform while some rough stuff is going on in your personal life just mentally? Yeah, sure. How tough is that? I'm fortunate enough to be able to compartmentalize. A lot of actors like to use some of their stuff if you're doing something that and there's some acting techniques that sort of channel it. Yeah, which I think is kind of, I don't know that that's, I don't know, for me it's not really the thing because I think if the writing is great, the writing is really good. You don't need to channel much. You need to invest in what's there and what I've always loved about that illusion is really cracking a scene, getting it to a point where you are feeling all of it. And the most edifying stuff I've been a part of as an actor, and I would say that it mostly comes out of dramatic work, is when you actually feel the emotions that your character would feel truly. And it's not because you're pulling from a tragic thing that happened or a lost loved one or a lost love or any of that. I just did this one movie where we're doing the thing and it was a wonderful cast and a great film and I'm given a speech at a wedding and it really got to us. It got to me and then one of the other actors came up and hugged me in the characters that we were, but the stakes of his character and what he's walked into him, the family that he's marrying into and what my character, my character's wife want for my wife's sister and this whole thing. And it all became very real. That was a set where the director showed up to set every day making sure that emotionally, and it was a very dramatic film, making sure that emotionally the table was set for his actors. Great crew and a really nice, tight little quick family as a lot of these movies are. You really love working with these people and then it's over. That's when you feel the drug. It's like when you're golfing and it's on the green. You're like, oh, I get it now. So in the words, you can find the emotion. The words summon the emotion. The humanity is right there. If you read a great script, you're going to sob in your living room. You know what the saddest, the toughest thing about being an actor is from my totally outside perspective is from the people I've interacted with is how intimate that process is between the group of people that create a thing. That's a movie. And then you move on to the next thing. It's almost, it's like, I don't know. I mean, that's why people have relationships on set. They get, they fall in love totally. So sad. I mean, that's why I think of the acting world is like you fall in love with each other, essentially. You become close friends and then you move on because that's kind of the process of career. You know, like the example I just gave, if you're doing it right, yeah, there is a certain amount of that happening. But I do still feel like you can, you got to compartmentalize it and you've got to be able to wash it off as soon as it's over. Prostitutes say the same thing. So I, it's where I try. Well, I, sometimes I'm in a hurry to get away from everybody because it's been, it's been very emotional and with all love and respect to everyone, this was awesome. But you get pretty good at saying goodbye and being like, I'll see you if I see you, you have to get good at that or else you'll never, you'll just be bent up all the time. I saw an actor once, we were doing this series and we did it for a year and it was, it was a lot of fun and it was a tight little group. And then one of the actors, we were doing one of our last things together. We had already shot the last show and we just had to take some pictures for, you know, it's like some publicity pictures or whatever. So we're set up and we're taking our pictures together and then we move into these single shots and this actor was finished and I watched them. It's like, okay, so-and-so is wrapped in and they said some goodbyes and stuff. And I didn't say my goodbye because I just did, I, maybe I preferred an Irish goodbye. I feel like we've said everything, you know what I mean? And this person knows that I revere them and they're an idol of mine and they walked out, walked off the sound stage and I literally thought to myself, that'll be the last time I see that person. And the show did not come back and that was the last time, I don't know, I'll see them around- Doesn't that just break your heart? A little bit, but I know what she's going back to, which is her family. And that's more important than all of this. And that's the thing about a TV family or a movie family when you get together and you're a family for a while, you are, you spend your days together. A lot of times you see the people that you work with more than you see your loved ones. So in showbiz, it's no different, right? And yeah, you're doing some, you know, you got to say words and every once in a while you got to kiss someone or pretend you love them. But it's just, it underscores how, for me, look man, my salvation is always been. And I feel so fortunate to have had it is this kind of chill, boring kind of upbringing that I want for my kids someday. And I can't wait to get back to my house with my fiance and the dogs, you know, until we have kids and- You live in the cabin in Canada somewhere. Absolutely. I just want to buy some land over an aquifer, as I like to say, because water will be the new money and just make sure that all my kids are drinking as much H2O as I am, which is a lot. I'm peeing right now, as a matter of fact. Do you need a bathroom? No, no, no. Not anymore. No, I'm wearing two layers. It depends. Don't worry about it. Good. So I did a podcast with Bobby Lee and he said he was extremely kind and he said that he was scare shitless to be on the podcast. And he actually literally took, he asked as the first thing to go take a dump because of how scared he was. So that leads me to a question. What's the scariest thing you've ever done? Or maybe what's the scariest you've ever been before performance? I mean, I always get a little nervous. I think you're doing it right if you're still nervous, you know? Are you nervous today? Well, no, man, because this isn't a performance. I'm being completely genuine. Yeah, you're wearing a suit. Yeah, that was. I feel like that makes you nervous. It makes me nervous. Listen, I hate wearing a fucking collar. If you're watching this on YouTube, you can see me just. This is, yeah. I'm constantly doing, it's like I'm doing like a cheap Rodney Dangerfield, but I am truly. When you move your head, it kind of makes it seem like you're like a mobster who's pissed off a little bit. You fucking crossed me one last time. You son. You know, it's mud. I think it's the first time I've dug a hole. I'll dig a fucking hole, Jesus. No, but truly, I hate having a collar. I can't wait to just wear pajamas in that fucking cabin or nothing at all, walk around Bobby Lee style. This most scared I've been before a performance. I can't pinpoint anything. You know, when I was a kid, right, I, like I said, I was fortunate enough to start acting as a teen and stuff professionally. And I just remember my first gig and I remember saying my handful of lines in the bathroom mirror the night before going, this might be my only fucking shot. You're not going to get me. I'm going to be solid. And I, when I'm, if I'm worried about something, I will rehearse it and rehearse it and rehearse it as an actor until it's impossible for me not to get a take at least that I'm 100% if not 95 maybe percent happy with. And the rest for me is letting go, which is hard because I can be a real perfectionist. I always want another, I always want to do it a little better. That's what's great about podcasting is one take and you're done. There's no takes. You're just talking and it's over and you're doing some silly stuff. And I'll, I'll, you know, can you say that part again about why podcasting is great? Podcasting is great. Yeah. Because it's one take and it's over. It's what? I said it again. Ah, fuck. I see what you did. And I, yeah, I fell right for it. But I'm playing checkers and you're playing chess. That's your problem. You know, but still when we do the podcast, we'll like finish and I'll look over at chat and I go, that one thing that I did wasn't that fun. He's like, shut up, man. Just, it doesn't matter. It's a fucking hang. We're just, we're hanging with our friends out there. That's what we're doing. So that anxiety is there. That self criticism or whatever that is, that voice. I say sorry after takes. I'll always finish a take and go, and I've had directors, to the detriment of myself, I've had directors be like, stop doing that. Yeah. It was all like finished take and then I also have like the will phase when I'm just like, I'll finish take and cut. And I'm making a face right now. Like I smelled something. That's what I'll do. I'll literally be like, ah, cause I just, I, I, I look at, I look at, I look at, I look at what I do in the pure sense as I think, I think a lot of people want to be good at something. I've only, the only thing I've ever really wanted to be good at is being an actor. And that's, that's the only thing, of course I want to be a good person. I want to be a good partner to my fiance. I want to have kids and be the father that I had and want to be the parent that I had from my parents who were fucking amazing, wonderful people. And there's all those things. That's all, that's all, you know, you should want all those things, but as far as doing a thing, like what is my, what is my trade? You know, I want to be really good at it. My parents grew up in Napoli in Italy, right? And I say Napoli because I'm Italian. And so my grandfather and my mom's side, my nono Pepe, he was a plumber and he was also, he was also like a handyman. Like people would bring him like, you know, like the old Chianti bottle with like, with the woven bottom part, like people would bring him like a broken bottle. Be like, Hey, you know, Giuseppe, can you fix this? And he'd be saying, I feel like you're telling the backstory of Mario. That's not actually your family life. Yeah, but okay. Yeah. Yeah. And so he would fix a bottle and give it back to someone. And he was a, he was a really good plumber. My mom used to always say that guy was an amazing, he was a great. You took pride in that. Yeah. I always feel like, you know, there's what you set out to do as an idealistic little teenager. I want to be like so and so, and I want to, you know, hear my big dreams and stuff. And I can't believe that I'm still in the business. Okay. That's, first of all, let me say that right now. I can't, I can't believe it. But what I've re what I really, I, it's the one thing that it's like, I can't give up on a take, you know, I need it to be as good as I can possibly get it. And I don't really know why that is outside of wanting to be good at something. When you open the yellow pages, if I'm a plumber, I'm not, you know, I, I'm not Roto-Rooter. Like I'm not the guy with the big full page ad, but I'm also not, you know, triple A abacus brothers or whatever, like the shitty one. I would like to hope that just, and I'm saying this with, with pride for what I do. I'm not trying to say here's my standing or where I want to be in the fucking business. That's not what I mean. I mean that I want to be good at it. You know, we all, hello, Friedman enterprises. That's the hotel phone. Hello? You have some fruit? Some sliced fruit? No. Do you want some sliced fruit? I'm all good. No, we're good. Thank you so much. All right. Bye-bye. It's always a fruit plate. Everyone's always trying to hand you a fruit plate in life, you know? It's a pretty sweet existence. Would that be funny if that was actually like the CIA and they were actually saying something else and this is, I'm just saying fake stuff about you want some fruit? Yeah, I want some fruit. And then all of a sudden there's the red dot on my head and the ceiling disappears. And the CIA was like, wrap it up, wrap it up, wrap it up. Wrap it up. You jump out the window and there's a helicopter waving. What were we talking about? The fruit distracting me. So oh, the, do you want to be the yellow page ad? I want to be the guy on the second or third page where it's like, you're not going to, you're not going to pay what that guy charges you, but we're not going to, I'm not going to charge you with this loser chart. You know, I want to break down the middle and the work is guaranteed. That's kind of what I want to, you know, it's the one thing that I, that I've been fortunate enough to be doing my whole life and that I want to, that I want to be good at, you know, everyone wants to be good at something. If you're fortunate enough to be able to do what you love as a job, I mean, my God, I'm so, I'm, I, again, I can't believe I get to do it. I just want to be good at it so that I can fucking, you know, die someday and go, I tried not to give up on a take and I, you know, and I will rehearse it still in the, in the bathroom mirror the night before if I have to. Yeah, but I still, I have that self-critical voice. I just, after every, after this podcast, I'll probably be like, you, you're boring. Why are you so boring? And I just gave a lecture at MIT. I was like, I, I, I, I get so much love from people. There's such beautiful people. And I just remember walking home just feeling like, like I wasted everybody's time, you know? And then it's, it's, I don't know what that is. I don't, you know, I, I do hope that that's a voice that won't destroy me, you know, like no, I, I think that's really human of you to admit that because people don't want to, they wouldn't assume that of course from you or anything that, I mean, you've got a large group of students in there listening to you and feeling the way and thinking what they think of you. So that's really interesting to hear you admit that, but it's also, I would expect nothing else. You have to be able to, it's such a, I mean, you're a human fucking being. And I'm trying to figure out if that, you know, some people that might hear that, they would say, well, that's a problem you have to fix. And I think that that might be just who I am. Because I'm not, you know, I've been very, very fortunate not to have chemical, you know, like the depression where I get into a dark place, like it gets stuck in a downward spiral. It's usually a thing that lasts, you ride it out and then after a good night's sleep, you're back to, back to your happy self. So I think I have to try to figure that out. Is that just part of the creative process, being a creative human in this world? I haven't found any other way. I'm always kicking myself. Take that, doozy. You can't, you can't, you're not going to be human until you feel some despair. Yeah. Until you absolutely hate the shit that you're doing sometimes. What small act of kindness were you once shown that you'll never forget? Do you, does something jump to mind where somebody just did something that made you smile? That you feel connected to the rest of humanity? Yeah. Yeah. Lots of things, you know? But I remember my niece one time, one of my nieces, we were in her neighborhood and she was like, she might've been five or six at the time. We're all adults now, my brother and sister are older than me and the kids are all, the youngest is 22. And yeah, anyway, one of my nieces, she was just, she had ice cream. We went out and we got ice cream walking around the neighborhood, her neighborhood. And she said something to me that I don't think she understands how much it meant at the time. But she goes, she goes, people love you here. You know that? And she doesn't know where here is. She's five years old. But she was just looking at the kids playing in the park and the people walking their dogs and everyone just, people love you here, you know that? But she didn't know how much I needed to hear that at that point, which is really heavy for me. I'll never forget it. I've never told her that. Oh well. Man, anytime you get a little something from people, especially in a tear your ass out city like LA where somebody has any fucking time for you, when someone can slow it down and say something, I saw this actor once in my grocery store that I go to who, I don't know, who made me laugh so fucking hard in this one movie. And every time I see this clip, I still laugh. And I am kind of shy, you know, personally, but so he, he was walking by, he was walking out and I was walking in and I go, oh, that's a guy. And I did not stop to just let him know how great I thought he was in this film. And I always kind of regretted it. You know what I mean? So as hard as it is, and sometimes I still don't, if I see someone that has done something in, in, you know, in any way, it doesn't have to be in show business or anything like that. I'll try, you know, I'll try and say, hey, that's, that's really good. You know what I mean? Because to get that from someone can mean a lot, you know? At a certain time in life when you need it, that can make a big difference. I mean, I, sorry to take it back to my new girlfriend, the waitress, but she, there's something about her saying sweetheart. Yeah. I was in a pretty low place for some reason mentally and just that kind of, that basic human kindness was nice. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I hear you. I was at a restaurant in New York recently and I was shooting something and my fiance was able to fly in for a week. And but she was back at the hotel and it's like, I felt like I was cheating on her because there was this nice waitress at this barbecue place I went to. And first of all, my fiance would not like me eating any greasy, sugary barbecue. So felt like I was cheating on her. We'll edit this out and put delicious vegan food over it. But the waitress was one of these, you know, she was this, this is the kind of server who's like, hey hun, you think, hey sweetie, like blah, blah, blah. But like so chill and at ease in the middle of a part of New York that's really, you know, kind of fucking pretentious and you know, and everybody, but sweet people, fucking way better people here. But you know, I know that, but you know, it's part of New York and whatever I'm there working and people I'm like, you know, I've been trying to impress one another. And she was just, she even had some sort of an accent that was not, didn't feel like an Atlantic American accent. Yeah. Are those, those, yeah, servers that say sweetheart and hun. Yeah. That's what we need from AI. We need that, that Jetsons server. Every once in a while it just calls you sweetheart. What comforts you on bad days? Oh man. Is there little sources of comfort, small things they do that kind of make you feel good? Like for Bobby, that'd be a little Skyrim, little stroll through Skyrim. Well I, I've been a line of coke or what? Yeah, line it, Atlantic, I dilute some coke into whiskey in the morning, like Stevie Ray Vaughn and then I snored whiskey. I didn't know that. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah, he didn't last too long. Weird. Well his music will last forever. See, there you go. For me, if I, I'm kind of a homebody. So if I, the, the point at which I smoke just a little bit of pot and then go like lay down on the couch and, and perhaps if my fiance is kind of nodding off or she's just like looking at her phone and I sneakily turn on some wrestling. Okay. Cause I grew up watching wrestling and that stuff, it's the Skyrim effect. I mean, you want to talk about a complete escape. This stuff makes no sense in the world. It's an art form that is so uniquely weird, but at the same time, so everyone, when it's good, everyone is invested in the illusion, even the audience. They cheer the good guys, they boo the bad guys. So if I'm like that, and then I got our two cute little dogs there and I'm annoying my little dog, Lulu and you know, trying to kiss him right on the fucking mouth and I've had a little bit of pot and the dog's like, stop, the pot's not good for me. Um, of course don't ever blow pot into your dog's face. That's that's a small comfort. I guess that's a handful of things. No that moment painted, that was like a little painting. What about you? You're not supposed to do this. Well, you're not supposed to do this. That's a good question. Yeah, it's a tough question. I would say, I would say programming robots, I there's bringing to life, actually programming at all. And so I don't know if you're how familiar you are with programming, but you write some text on a page, right, on a screen and it's brought to life, like it does something. And that's kind of, that's a really tiny version of maybe having a child. Like you, you created something that is now living. Yeah. In some smaller big way with embodied robots that are legged robots. That's especially clear. And for some reason, that's a source of comfort for me, that the power of programming, but also the elegance of programming, just the whole thing. It's a source of happiness. There's so many things I've been very blessed with enjoying anything. Like that's part of the struggle I have in life is that the simple stuff is a source of a lot of happiness for me, which leads to a lot of laziness. So I have to like give myself artificial deadlines. I have to be freaking out on purpose in order to be productive in this world at all. You seem like an extremely dutiful, busy guy. No. No? No, I am, but because I'm constantly creating artificial stress and deadlines and all that kind of stuff. Otherwise I would just sit there looking at a tree happy. I'm truly happy with everything. That's awesome. Yeah. Gee whiz. It's not. But that line of coke in the whiskey in the morning, that's the thing that does the trick. Give you a VON breakfast shake. By the way, one of my most favorite guitars. I play guitar too, that's a source of comfort. Oh yeah, I have seen you play some guitar, that's awesome. Who's the greatest wrestler of all time? Greatest in-ring performer of all time is Bret the Hitman Hart. What's the difference in-ring versus- Well, there's many facets to the art form. A lot of people are great on the mic, but they're not so great once they get in the ring. A lot of people have all the showmanship and stuff, but then they're not necessary. It's a wonderful package, but then they get to the ring or they open their mouth and there's nothing going on. Who's the greatest in-ring performer? I think the greatest in-ring is Bret Hart. I don't think there's anyone better than Bret the Hitman Hart. What makes him so good? Well he- I think I had an action figure of him. In Russia, we didn't know what the hell that was. Sure. I think he's the guy in pink tights. Everything makes sense. Every single thing is rooted in the thing that just happened and everything that he does is to set up what he's going to do. They call it, and I'm just a wrestling nerd, but the wrestlers I guess call it ring psychology. The things that you have to do to make it seem like you're suffering or you're coming from behind or whatever. Then also just the physicality of it. He does it at a- he would do it at a hundred miles an hour and never hurt anybody. Although I also love the greatest wrestler of all time everyone says, and they're right, is Ric Flair. Nature boy Ric Flair. Everyone says this? Yeah, I think if you know what you're talking about. Because he's the best on the mic, he's also incredible in the ring. Then for me, the sentimental favorite, which we've actually on Doodsy Chad had sort of a Charlie Rose-esque interview with me about this, my fascination with Hulk Hogan. Because to me, just he was Superman. I was a little kid and I saw him and that's imprinted. But yeah, see this is like asking me who my favorite child is. The rock when the rock was- I mean the rock's the rock. Yeah. Hulk Hogan is- he's the weirdest one, right? For me from the outside. Super weird. That- I don't know what that is exactly. Everything's weird about him. Yeah. He's got the bald head. He would proudly have this bald head with long hair, the handlebar mustache, and this ketchup and mustard tights, which he says he credits McDonald's with the tights. He literally does. He says that the red and yellow came from Angelo Poffo, who's Randy Macho Man Savage and Lanny Poffo's dad, who was a wrestler and a promoter. He said that he saw him wearing yellow and he's a Tampa guy, so he had that brown skin and the hair and everything. So he's like, oh, that's what I want to do. And also the brand recognition of like, well, I should do it like McDonald's. Literally. And he's a big swollen muscular guy with tan brown skin screaming at me to eat my vitamins and stuff when I'm eight years old. That was extremely- yeah, he's like Superman. But I know there's a person behind that guy. Yeah. What do you mean? Well, he's Terry Bollea, the dude who does whatever the fuck he does with his life. You know what I mean? Yeah. Complicated life. Yeah, I guess. Yeah, I mean- To be him, yeah. Maybe you should change the dude's colors to yellow, right? Red and yellow. It's currently orange and boy sky blue. Yeah, it's like a nice sky blue. What advice, since you're wearing a suit, I feel like you're qualified to give advice. What advice would you give to young people? High school, college, about how to have a career they can be proud of or how to have a life they can be proud of? I mean, you have to listen to your gut all the time. That's the compass that we have, is listening to your gut. What did your gut tell you? Was that originally the dream of being an actor? Yeah, for me. Your parents support that at all? I had the advantage of having parents who were immigrants, so they didn't really know a lot about what you- You just made shit up? You just made shit up? Yeah, of course I'm studying and I'm skipping school to go do auditions and stuff. No, I just kind of feel like, and I know it was different from my older siblings because my parents had just shown up in Canada. I was born like 10 years later. You can get away with some things and you can actually, I think my parents, they wanted us to, they didn't have a whole lot to tell us about what to do. They weren't going to do that with us because they're in this brand new world and there's all these possibilities. But there was something that I feel like they had to do, which was tell us to do what we love. If you love doing it, do it. I feel like that's really served me and what I would tell young people is if you can find something you love and nowadays with the internet and finding other people that it's not like you need to find a lot of people anymore. You just need to find the people that dig what you dig and if you can make a career out of doing something that you love that's been said, it's a good thing. How long did it take you to figure out that you really love acting? Because sometimes you have a dream and then the dream meets reality, right? Yeah. The reality might be much less pleasant or much darker than the dream. The reality is less pleasant and there are things that happen during an experience of shooting something that you could take or leave. But the part where you're on set and you've rehearsed for a minute or whatever, at least you know where you're supposed to stand and all your life show up knowing everything, knowing what you're going to do and what you aim to do. Those moments make it all worth it when you're not sounding like a douchebag but between action and cut, that's the stuff that has me continuing to do what I do. Aside from the fact that it's like, I don't know how to do anything else. You think you'll ever do a dramatic, like a mob movie? Yeah. I'm going to the Inside Game and I was just talking about it. This is another movie I just did. It was a little while ago called American Woman that was very heavy. I love doing dramatic work. I love it. I love it. Yeah. And I played that in Inside Game, it was kind of a, there was a mob element and the fellow was, well, the stories here or there with regard to how deep into the... Well, he was a bookie. He was just running money. He was making a lot of money for a lot of people and he figured out how to cook it with this dude who was an NBA ref and it's a very interesting documentary, the thing that they just untold under the untold series, they cover it. But getting to play that guy, that was a gas for me because he's like a... There's a lot of unsavory stuff and he's definitely the guy, the character in the movie who is the wild card and you don't want to necessarily mess with him. And I got this, I remember this fellow who was a real guy speaking to him, it was just bizarre to hear, like I said to him, he was a little concerned about this and that. Like, hey, you say whatever the fuck you want in your movie. I got my book and I got this other fucking deal. But he goes, I didn't do this and I didn't do that. And I'm like, yeah, all right, I got you. And he goes, yeah, I'm telling you. I'm talking to you. I did not do this, I did, okay? I'm just fucking telling you, do whatever the fuck you want with your movie, but this is what's up. And I said, you ever seen Goodfellas? He's like, yeah, I fucking love that movie. Because like I said, he did some unsavory shit. And I go, you remember the scene where the guy, Lorraine Barocco's neighbor made her uncomfortable and was touching on her and she goes to Ray Liotta and he goes, where the fuck does this guy live? And then he goes, and remember, and he walks across the street and pistol whips the dude. You touch her again, you're dead. You hear me? Yeah, good scene. Don't you fucking great scene. He goes, I love that scene. I go, that's you. So you're doing shit that we know is terrible, but we love you. He goes, all right, I got it. And then I said, there's this one scene, I explained the scene to him where one of the mobsters, tough guys was in the window of the car. And Jimmy, my character is very coked up at the time and he's hemorrhaging money here and there and making bad bets because he's getting sloppy. And this guy wants to bug him about some Jets Giants bet or something. I'm like telling you fucking asshole, don't fucking do it. He's like, yeah, well, the fucking Giants. And in the scene, Jimmy, my character grabs him by the lapels and just smashes his face against the roof of the car. And I say this to Jimmy and he goes, oh yeah, I would have done that. That's not a fucking big deal. I wonder also the interaction. I wonder what the filming of probably my favorite gambling movie is a casino with Joe Pesci and De Niro. Like when they're out in the desert yelling at each other. I wonder how many takes that is. Like because they I don't know how scripted that is. I mean, it probably is a little bit, but like I don't think you can script the performance that Joe Pesci does. Don't make a fuck out of me, Ace. Like I fucking brought you here. Yeah. He's just like pointing at that energy and they're standing there and their friendship. And then De Niro's like that whole thing and then in the pet, like that energy. What is that? I mean, they must, they somehow find it together. You could tell me that that was one take and I believe you. You could tell me that that was seven takes and I would believe. I bet you all the takes had that energy. Like they were playing with it, right? They were, they're playing with that. This, yeah, I mean, they took on a real personality in those scenes and really carried them forward. I mean, it's just a brilliant, brilliant performance. Doesn't get like comedies, like mob movies probably don't get enough credit either because it's seen as like mob movies don't get enough credit. Maybe not in the Oscars. I mean, like, oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because it seems like a trope. It's like given a Western, it's got to be a hell of a Western or whatever. Because it's like an old Hollywood trope. Yeah, no, I, that scene is so great because they're never, they're at the height of their friendship in a way. And they're also pretty much about to let go of it and become enemies. And both things are happening at the same time. And Pesci drives them out to the desert. And if I remember correctly, the Nero's character, A. Racine, a Rothschild, he says, I gave myself 50-50 whether I'm coming back. Yeah, it's such a good scene. Usually my prospects of coming back from the desert would be 90 to 10 or something like that. But now it's this time I wasn't sure. And there's the car driving really fast. And then Joe Pesci is like, you motherfucker, you like whatever he was doing. Yeah. A Jew, of course there's anti-Semitism. Yeah. Or not, between friends, who gives a shit? All that kind of stuff. Yeah. I mean, brilliant, brilliant performances. So yeah, I can understand why you love the art and putting it all out there and leaving it. Yeah, it's fun. And it's still fun. It's still crazy fun. If I go a while without getting a gig, if I go a minute, then I end up and I work on something, it's like, oh, I've been thirsty for this. I actually am really so happy. Even if it's something where it's like the things where this was a pain in the ass and that or whatever, you're on the road doing something and anything, whatever, you lost your luggage or whatever the heck you've got going on in your day to day life that everyone brings to work and tries to let go of. Once we're doing the scene, oh man, it's the best. But that said, you're a great actor, but I just think I speak for a lot of people that you're also there's a charisma to you that's great to reveal in raw form in different podcasts. Oh, Jesus. In Doodsy, 10 Minute Pod, just as a guest in podcasts, it's always really fun to watch you. Cheers. The way you have fun, the way you think. The raw, the raw will sassle, which is a nice compliment to your kind of acting role. That's really sweet. Yeah, cheers. Well, you know, look, you said, you know, you're making that face. I'm making that face. I'm making that after the take face. No, I love doing stuff off the cuff. That's kind of you to say. And I dig. I really do dig doing stuff in front of an audience because I love seeing. I don't give it to myself very often. If I'm doing, even if I'm, you know, I've done a bunch of multi-camera sitcoms and stuff. Mad TV was shot in front of a live studio audience. You like that energy. I love it. But I can only hear them. You can't see them because of the lights like it is in a lot of performances. And I would imagine with stand up, it's, you know, you see the first couple of rows. I've done a, I do this character that does stand up and I used to take him out and do things with him and do little bits here and there. I haven't done it in like four or five years. I think did Bobby say that character opened up for Bobby? Yeah. But he said I have to do it as myself too. I think in that podcast, he's like, okay, you're going to come with me and open for me and Brea, but you have to do it as yourself. Did that ever happen? It did. And I did the character, you know, who's the character I came up with on 10 Minute Podcast. He's just this comedian, right? He calls himself an open mic veteran. You know, he's been doing open mics forever. And so I did it, opening up for Bobby and he's like, you have to do some of it as yourself. So I just kind of did this bit where I would do some of his jokes and then I would take Lee Leon, silly, I got a fucking wig on and I take the wig off and I go, and as myself, I start explaining it. Hello, my name is Will. See the reason that it's funny is because Arnold Schwarzenegger is always, he's in these movies and he's got the thick Austrian accent, but he's like, my name is Ben Williams. I'm a cop from Colorado. No, you're not. And it doesn't make sense as the comedian character that I'm doing, because that character doesn't do impersonations. Okay. Carrying on. And then I put the wig back on and go back into this dumb thing. And I don't think it was very good, but Bobby required it in order for me to open for him. He's like, you're not fucking doing it. So I'm not going to get up on stage and not do, we agreed, I'll do it. But having been up there just in, you know, whatever, I've done it like a dozen fucking times or not a bunch of times, right? Like nothing. And, you know, these comedians that go up every night, sometimes two times a night, that's, I will say, I love performing in front of people when I get the chance, but it's a specific thing that I just, I don't know, I got to go back to this. It's like the providing value. I think great standups are fucking incredible. I'll go, you know, when I've gone and watched standup, you know, there's your friend you're going to see, but then there's this other person who really speaks to you. You know what I mean? And if you like one comedian a night, that's a lot. Because a comedy club is like a fucking crazy restaurant where there's no menu. And it's like, what would you like? There's nothing else like that. There's like, you don't go to like a like music place. What do we got here? We got Christian metal and there's some world music and then there's a reggae thing and it's all rammed in together. So you don't go to a restaurant, I'd love a nice steak. Cool. First, here's a bowl of Fruit Loops and then we got you a crudite and then this is our sushi tower and well, what about the steak? Oh, the steak's coming and then blah, blah, blah. Oh no, the steak got bumped. So there's no steak, but here's a fucking shitty store bought cheesecake. You know, and that's what comedians are up against when they go into a place. It's like, I don't pair well with the poached salmon. You know, I'm chicken fingers. I already, I already am chicken fingers. So you know, these great comedians that are able to go up on a night where poached salmon goes up and then it's like, fuck, I'm, you were also spicy. I got some kick to me. For me, even going to open mics, it could be a wonderful escape. Yeah. I mean, just laughing, laughing together with others. It can make you, I don't know, it just feels really good. When we've done like, you know, like, and I hope to do it with Doodsy, but like live podcasts are fun in front of groups of people and you know, you talk to them afterwards and take some pictures and man, they are, they forgot what the fuck they got going on. And a lot of them got to go back to work the next day. It's Wednesday or Thursday, you know? No, it's a lot of value. I'm fortunate enough to be busy doing my own bullshit. What's the meaning of life, was Asa? What is the meaning of life? Why? Why are we here? Why? Why? Why is the meaning of life, didn't they explain it at the end of Meaning of Life? I think it was Michael Palin that said, try to get a walk in, be nice to neighbors, eat enough fiber. Wasn't that the fiber? Fiber is part of it? Yeah, I think it's nutrition. I think it's half a bowl of bran in the morning and don't take yourself too seriously. Yeah. Well, no one gets out alive, I think is the Herman Hesse, one of my favorite writers, he's a Nobel Prize winner in a book called Steppenwolf. He says, learn what is to be taken seriously and laugh at the rest. Oh, that's awesome. What's the percentage distribution on that? So how much of life should you take seriously? And then how much do you just laugh at? Oh man, if you can laugh at everything, you're winning. But that's almost impossible. I think that there's, and also could be quite irresponsible to do that. I take things, I take a lot of things way too seriously. I know that. I do, I do, I really do. People will be in part surprised by that, but I think that radiates from you. Really? Yeah, I do. I do. I take things way too fucking seriously sometimes. But yeah, you got to loosen the neck up. But no, I think that's really good. That's really good stuff. I don't know what the percentage is to have a good life or a happy, healthy life, but for me, the meaning of life is getting to live it as long as you hope to. That's nice. And when you lose someone or if perhaps you're faced with your own mortality, I think that puts that into perspective. But, you know. Get lots of fiber. Get lots of fiber. Be nice to everybody. And yeah, don't take things too seriously, it's a good one. Our minds are fucking big, weird, it's a big, weird shitty fucking bucket of shit that's trying to get you to think horrible shit about yourself all the time. Shitty bucket of shit. Shitty bucket of shit. I think there's a book I never read, but I read the title and it's Good Words to Live By which is Don't Sweat the Small Stuff and It's All Small Stuff. That's another way. Was that Dr. Phil? Wasn't Dr. Phil with- I don't know, but I think the conclusion also has fiber as part of it. I think that all ties it together and in the end, of course, just put love out there in the world. I think that's a pretty good way to go. What would you say is the meaning of life? Put love out of the world? I would say love, yeah. Yeah. It's a long conversation on what that really means, but I'm sure robots are involved. Yeah. Well, let me tell you, I feel a little safer knowing that someone who has a hand in bringing these robots to the masses as you do has that opinion of love and how important it is. I think that's great because otherwise it's going to be that fucking scene from T2 where Linda Hamilton's holding onto the fence and getting all of her flesh blown off of her skeleton before the rest of her is wiped away because this is Skynet shit. Anyway, I'm just terrified of Doodsy all the time. That's why I think that they will- Doodsy in the wrong hands can do a lot of damage. That's why Chad and I need to do our best to control it. We need to travel back in time and murder Chad, I think. That's the only way. It's been said- I don't know why you need to travel back in time, but you can murder him today, but I think that'll be very suspicious. My nefarious plans for Chad involve going back to tomorrow and planning for yesterday and hopefully Doodsy will give me the answer there with what it is to do with Chad's frozen body. If I got to drive it out to, if I got to get a hold of one of those Tesla mom vans and shove my garage freezer in it and plug it in and shove Chad in there, drive out to Arizona and deliver him under a mountain or wherever the fuck this place is and say, here's this dog tag. What does this get me? And I'm like, ah, it's going to be 300 bucks. Do you have a, do you take Amex? No. And I'd be like, ah shit. And I'll just dump them somewhere, breaking bad stuff. Well, I would like to thank you and the, what is it? The Canadian International Agency Apparel. Canadian International Apparel. I can't wait for the sneakers from Doodsy. I can't wait for all the, all the, the podcasts that AI can and all the trouble it can get you in. So I'm a huge fan of yours. It's a huge honor that you would talk with me today. Well, this has been amazing. Cheers pal. Likewise. And I'm happy to be here, man. Cheers. Bam. Oh, that was three hours. Holy fuck. What? Thanks for listening to this conversation with Will Sasso. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from John Candy, one of Will's favorite actors. I think I may have become an actor to hide from myself. You can escape into a character. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.