 The following is a conversation with Sarah Walker and Lee Cronin. They have each been on this podcast once before individually and now for their second time they're here together. Sarah is an astrobiologist and theoretical physicist. Lee is a chemist and if I may say so the real life manifestation of Rick from Rick and Morty. They both are interested in how life originates and develops both life here on earth and alien life including intelligent alien civilizations out there in the cosmos. They are colleagues and friends who love to explore disagree and debate nuanced points about alien life and so we're calling this an alien debate. Very few questions to me are as fascinating as what do aliens look like, how do we recognize them, how do we talk to them, and how do we make sense of life here on earth in the context of all possible life forms that are out there. Treating these questions with the seriousness and rigor they deserve is what I hope to do with this conversation and future ones like it. Our world is shrouded in mystery. We must first be humble to acknowledge this and then be bold and diving in and trying to figure things out anyway. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description it's the best way to support this podcast. We got Uncruise for adventure, Linode for cloud computing, ExpressVPN for privacy, Roka for style, and athletic greens for performance. Choose wisened my friends. And now onto the full ad reads. As always no ads in the middle. I try to make this interesting but if you skip them please still check out the sponsors. I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by a new sponsor called Uncruise Adventures. Small ship cruises sailing to Alaska, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Hawaii. Choose from hiking, kayaking, whale watching, seeing the northern lights, and much much much more. I have quite a bit of travel coming up and there's something about taking a journey out into the unknown and getting to see nature in ways that you haven't quite seen through the mundane day-to-day of your daily existence. Makes you both celebrate the new adventure and yet sort of rekindle your love for the place you call home. Anyway you can save 500 dollars on Alaskan adventures through June for bookings made within 30 days of departure by going to uncruise.com slash pages slash lex. That's uncruise spelled uncruise.com slash pages slash lex. This episode is also brought to you by Linode, Linux Virtual Machines. It's an awesome compute infrastructure that lets you develop, deploy, and scale what applications you build faster and easier. This is both for small personal projects and huge systems. Lower cost than AWS but more important to me is the simplicity quality of the customer service with real humans 24-7-365. I can't tell you first of all how much I love Linux and how much I love cloud services that provide that infrastructure and make it super easy to manage it, to monitor it, to scale things up, to make many copies of it. I mean just to run your computer infrastructure. It's the sexiest thing of all to me. Whenever you're doing business or even small-scale projects this is how you make it actually come to life. As they say if it runs on Linux it runs on Linode. Visit linode.com slash lex and click on the create free account button to get started with 100 bucks and free credit. That's linode.com slash lex. This episode is also brought to you by ExpressVPN. I use them to protect my privacy on the interwebs. I've used them for many many many years. I love ExpressVPN. The big red sexy button just makes my heart sing. There's a lot of reasons you want to use in VPN. ExpressVPN being the best one. First of all ISPs are still collecting your data. Internet service providers. It doesn't matter if you're using chrome incognito mode. They can still see all the shady stuff you do on the internet. Second, you can change the location if you watch different shows on Netflix and Hulu and so on. Change your graphic location in a split second and it unlocks those parts of those platforms. To me the most important thing is that ExpressVPN just works. It's fast. Whatever device you got. Whatever operating system including my favorite of course Linux. It works and it works wonderfully. It does a simple job and it does it well. Go to expressvpn.com slash lexpod to get an extra three months free. That's expressvpn.com slash lexpod. This show is also brought to you by Roca. The makers of glasses and sunglasses that I love wearing for their design feel and innovation on material optics and grip. Roca was started by two all-american swimmers from Stanford and was born out of an obsession with performance. I met one of those founders, Rob, and he's an awesome human being. They have a place here in Austin but more than the place the people both brilliant and passionate and they know what they want to do which is design a stylish eyewear. I was actually did a long run today and I wore the shades. Part of the reason I actually wore the shades it wasn't even that sunny is I want to kind of escape from the world. I want to hide myself from the world. Sometimes I just want to hide away. It's the introvert in me. I was listening to a good audiobook and I wanted to hide away and look good while doing it which is why I wore Roca sunglasses. Check them out for both prescription glasses and sunglasses at roca.com and enter code Lex to save 20% off on your first order. That's roca.com and enter code Lex. This show is also brought to you by Athletic Greens and it's newly renamed AG1 Drink which is an all-in-one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It replaced the multivitamin for me and went far beyond that with 75 vitamins and minerals. It's the first thing I drink every day. I drink it twice a day now. It brings my heart joy. The joy part might be a placebo effect. I don't know but the fact of the matter is I do some crazy stuff in terms of physical and mental undertakings. I also fast often. I do keto diets. I do carnivore. I do all kinds of crazy stuff and I can count on Athletic Greens to provide the nutritional bases that frees me to do the crazy stuff I do. That's freedom. It's having that nutritional foundation. They'll give you one month supply of fish oil when you sign up to athleticgreens.com slash Lex. That's athleticgreens.com slash Lex. This is the Lex treatment podcast and here is my conversation with Sarah Walker and Lee Cronin. First of all, welcome back Sarah. Welcome back Lee. You guys, I'm a huge fan of yours. You're incredible people. I should say thank you to Sarah for wearing really awesome boots. We'll probably overlay a picture later on but why the hell didn't you dress up Lee? No, this is me dressed up. You were saying that you're pink. That your thing is pink. My thing is black and white. The simplicity of it. Where's the pink? When did it hit you? I became pink about, I don't know actually, maybe 2017? Did you know me when you first? I think I met you pre-pink. Yeah, so about 2017 I think I just decided I was boring and I needed to make a statement and red was too bright so I went pink. Salmon pink. Well I think you were always pink. You just found yourself in 2017. There's an amazing photo of him where there's like everybody in their black gown and he's just wearing the pink pants. Oh that was at the Wagonon University. It's totally nuts. 100 year anniversary they got me to give the plenary and they didn't find that outfit for me so they were all wearing these silly hats and these gowns and there was me dressed up in pink looking like a complete idiot. We're definitely going to have to find that picture and overlay it. Big full screen, slow motion. All right, let's talk about aliens. We'll find places we disagree and places we agree. Life, intelligence, consciousness, universe, all of that. Let's start with a tweet from Neil deGrasse Tyson stating his skepticism about aliens wanting to visit Earth. Quote, how egocentric of us to think that space aliens who have mastered interstellar travel across the galaxy would give, pardon the French, would give a shit about humans on Earth. So I may ask you, would aliens care about visiting Earth, observing, communicating with humans? Let's take a perspective of aliens, maybe Sarah, first. Are we interesting in the whole spectrum of life in the universe? I'm completely biased, at least as far as I think right now we're the most interesting thing in the universe. So I would expect based on the intrinsic curiosity that we have and how much I think that's deeply related to the physics of what we are, that other intelligent aliens would want to seek out examples of the phenomena they are to understand themselves better. And I think that's kind of a natural thing to want to do and I don't think there's any kind of judgment on it being a lesser being or not. It's like saying you have nothing to learn by talking to a baby. You have lots to learn, probably more than you do talking to somebody that's 90. So yeah, so I think they absolutely would. So whatever the phenomena is that is human, there would be an inkling of the same kind of phenomena within alien species and they would be seeking that same. I think there's got to be some features of us that are universal and I think the ones that are most interesting, and I hope I live in an interesting universe, are the ones that are driven by our curiosity and the fact that our intelligence allows us to do things that the universe wouldn't be able to do without things like us existing. We're going to define a lot of terms. One of them is interesting. Yes. That's a very interesting term to try to define. Ali, what do you think are humans interesting for aliens? Well let's take it from our perspective. We want to go find aliens as a species quite desperately. So if we put the shoe on the other foot, of course we're interesting, but I'm wondering and assuming that we're at the right technological capabilities to go searching for aliens, then that's interesting. So what I mean is if there needs to be a massive leap in technology that we don't have, how will aliens prioritize coming to earth and other places? But I do think that they would come and find us because they want to find out about our culture, what things are universal. I mean I'm a chemist so I would say well is the chemistry universal? Are the creatures that we're going to find making all this commotion, are they made of the same stuff? What does their science look like? Are they off planet yet? I guess there's... So I think that Neil deGrasse Tyson is being slightly pessimistic and maybe trying to play the tune that the universe is vast and it's not worth them coming here. I don't think that, but I just worry that maybe we don't have the ability to talk to them, we don't have the universal translator, we don't have the right physics, but sure they should come. We are interesting. I want to know if they exist. It would make it easier if they just came. So again I'm going to use your tweets like it's Shakespeare and analyze it. So Sarah tweeted, thinking about aliens, thinking about aliens. So how much do you think aliens are thinking about other aliens, including humans? So you said we humans want to visit, like we're longing to connect with aliens. Why is that? Can you introspect that? Is that an obvious thing that we should be... Like what are we hoping to understand by meeting aliens? Exactly. Asking as an introvert, it's like I ask myself this all the time, why go out on a Friday night to meet people? What are you hoping to find? I think the curiosity, so when I saw Sarah put that tweet, I think I answered it actually as well, which was we are thinking about trying to make contact. So they're almost certain. Certainly are, but maybe there's a number of classes. There are those aliens that have not yet made contact with other aliens, like us. Those aliens have made contact with just one other alien and maybe it's an anti-climax and slime. And aliens that have made contact with not just one set of intelligent species, but several. That must be amazing actually. Literally there is some place in the universe there must be one alien civilization to not make contact with not one, but two other intelligent civilizations. So they must be thinking about it. There must be entire degree courses on aliens thinking about aliens and cultural, universal cultural norms. Do you think they will survive the meeting? And by the way, Lee did respond saying that's all the universe wants. So Sarah said thinking about aliens, thinking about aliens. Lee said that's all the universe wants. And then Sarah responded cheeky universe we live in. So cheeky is a cheeky version of the word interesting, all of which we'll try to define mathematically. Cheeky might be harder than interesting. Because there's humor in that too. Yes. I think there's a mathematical definition of humor, but we'll talk about that in a bit. Yeah, so if you're a graduate student alien looking at multiple alien civilizations, do you think they survive the encounters? I think there's a tendency to anthropomorphize a lot of discussions about alien life, which is a really big challenge. So usually when I'm trying to think about these problems, I don't try to think about us as humans, but us as an example of phenomena that exists in the universe that we have yet to explain. And it doesn't seem to be the case that if I think about the features, I would argue are most universal about that phenomena, that there's any reason to think that a first encounter with another lineage or example of life would be antagonistic. I think there's this kind of assumption, I mean going back to Neil deGrasse Tyson's quote, I mean it kind of bothers me because there's a, I mean I'm a physicist, so I know we have a lot of egos about how much we can describe the world, but that there's this like because we understand fundamental physics so well, we understand alien life and we can kind of extrapolate, and I just think that we don't. And the quest there is really to understand something totally new about the universe, and that thing just happens to be us. I agree, I agree, there's something else more profound. I think Neil was just being, again, he's just trying to stir the pot. I would say from a contingency point of view, I want to know how many ways does the universe build structures, build memories, right? And then I want to know if those memories can interact with each other, and if you have two different origins of life and then origins of intelligence and then these things become conscious, surely you want to go and talk to them and figure out what commonalities you share. And it might be that we're just unable to conceive of what they're going to look like, they're just going to be completely different, you know, infrastructure, but surely we'll want to go and find out a map, and surely curiosity is a property that evolution has made on Earth. And I can't see any reason that it won't happen elsewhere, because curiosity probably exists because we want to find innovations in the environment, we want to use that information to help our technology. And also curiosity is like planning for the future, are they going to fight us? Are we going to be able to trade with them? So I think that Neil's just, I don't know, maybe, you know, I mean give a shit, that's really, I think that's really down on Earth, right? How would aliens categorize humans, do you think? How would we, so let's put the other way around. Slime category? Maybe, no, no, no, we maybe we could, the thing is a bit odd, right? Look at Instagram, Twitter, all these people taking selfies, I mean does the universe, is the ultimate state of consciousness, thinking beings that take photographs themselves and upload them to an interweft with other thinking beings, looking at each other's photos. So I think that they will be, what's wrong with that? I did not say there was anything wrong with it. It's consciousness manifested at scale, yeah, selfies, yeah, it's like the mirror test at scale. Yeah, I do think that curiosity is really the driving force of why we have our technology, right? If we weren't curious, we wouldn't have left the cave. So I think that, so I think that Neil's got it completely wrong, in fact, actually. Of course, they'd want to come here. It doesn't mean they are coming here, we've seen evidence for that, I guess we can argue about that, right? But I think that we want, I desperately, and I know that Sarah does too, but I won't speak for you, you're here, you can, I desperately want to have missions to look for life in the solar system right now. I want to map life over the solar system, and then I want to understand how we can go and find life as quickly as possible at the nearest stars, and also at the same time do it in the lab just to compensate, you know, so sure. Yeah, I would, I just want to point on this, if you think about sort of what's driven the most, like, features of our own evolution as a species, you could, and try to map that to alien species, I always think like optimism is what's going to get us furthest, and so I think a lot of people always think that it's like war and conflict is going to be the way that alien species will expand out into the cosmos, but if you just look at how we're doing it and how we talk about it, it's always our future in space is always, you know, built from narratives of optimism, and so it seems to me that if intelligence does get out in the universe that it's going to be more optimism and curiosity driving it than war and conflict because those things end up crushing you. So there might be some selective filter, of course this is me being an optimist, I'm a half full kind of person, but... Is it obvious that curiosity, not obvious, but what do you think? Is curiosity a more powerful force in the universe than violence and the will to power? So, because you said you frame curiosity as a way to also plan on how to avoid violence, which is an interesting framing of curiosity, but I could also argue that violence is a pretty productive way to operate in the world, which is like, that's one way to protect yourself, the best defense is offense. I'm not qualified to answer this, but I'll have a go. I think... Let's not call it violence... That's the summary of this podcast. I would, yeah, maybe I would, let's not call it violence, but I call it erasure. So if you think about the way evolution works, all the way... Obviously, it's called that Seminary Theory, but I won't... So if you say you build... Curiosity allows you to open up avenues, new graphs, right? So new features you can play, what the ability to erase those things allows you to start again, and do some pruning. So the universe, I think, curiosity gets you further. Curiosity gets you rockets that land, it gets you robots that can make drugs, it gets you poetry and art and communication. And then, you know, I often think, wouldn't it be great in bureaucracy to have another world war? Not literally a world war now, please no world war, but a the equivalent, so we get remove all the admin bureaucracy, right? All the admin violence, get rid of it and start again. Do you know what I mean? Because you get layers and you get redundant systems built. So actually a reset, let's not call it violence, a reset in some aspects of our culture and our technology allows us to then build more important things without the... Because how many, you know, how many cookies do I have to click on? How many things, how many extra clicks do I have in the future of my life that I could remove and a bit of a reset would allow us to to start again. And maybe that's how I suppose our encounter aliens will be. Maybe they will fight with us and say, oh, we're not as excited by you as we thought, we'll just get rid of you. So they might want to reset earth. Yeah, why not? To be like, let's see how the evolution runs again. This seems like they've, there's nothing new happening here. They're observing for a while. This is just not, let's keep it more fun. Let's start with a fish again. I like how you equated violence to resetting your cookies. I suppose that's the kind of violence in this, this modern world where words are violence, resetting cookies. I don't know where that came from. I'm completely, yeah. That's poetic, really. Okay, so let's talk about life. What is life? What is non-life? What is the line between life and non-life? And maybe at any point we can pull in ideas of assembly theory. Like how do we start to try to define life? And for people listening, so Sarah identifies as a physicist and Lee identifies as a chemist. Of course, they are very interdisciplinary in nature in general, but. So what is life? Yeah, I love asking that question because it's so absurdly big. I know, I love it. It's my absolute favorite question in the whole universe. So I think I have three ways of describing it right now. And I like to say all three of them because people latch on to different facets of them. And so the whole idea of what Lee and I are trying to work on is not to try to define life, but to try to find a more fundamental theory that explains what the phenomena we call life. And then it should explain certain attributes. And you end up having a really different framing than the way people usually talk. So the way I talk about it, three different ways. Life is how information structures matter across space and time. Life is, I don't know, this one's from you actually, simple machines constructing more complex machines. And the other one is the physics of existence, so to speak, which is life is the mechanism the universe has to explore the space of what's possible. That's my favorite. So can I, yeah, can I add on to that? Okay, can you say the physics one again? The physics of existence. Yeah, the physics of existence. I don't know what to call it. You know, like if you think of all the things that could exist, only certain things do exist. And I think life is basically the universe's mechanism of bringing things into physically existing in the moment now. Yeah. And what's another one? We were debating this the other day. So if you think about a universe that has nothing in it, that's kind of hard to conceive of, right? Because this is where the physicists really go wrong. They think of a universe with nothing in it. They can't. And you think that existence is really hard to think. Non-exist, yeah. And then you think of a universe with everything in it. That's really hard. And you just have this white blob, right? This is everything. But the fact we have discrete stuff in the universe beyond, say, planets, so you've got stars, space, planet stuff, right? The boring stuff. But I would define life or say that life is where there are architectures, any architectures, and we should stop fixating on what is building the architectures to start with. And the fact that the universe has discrete things in it is completely mind blowing. If you think about it for one second, the fact there's any objects at all, and there's, because for me, the object is a proxy for a machine that built it. Some information being moved around, actuation, sensing, getting resource, and building these objects. So for me, everyone's been obsessing about the machine. But I'm like, forget the machine. Let's see the objects. And I think in a way that assembly theory, we realized maybe a few months ago that assembly theory actually does account for the soul and the objects, not mystically like say, Sheldrek's morphic resonance or Leibniz's monodology, seeing souls in things. But when you see an object, and I've said this before, but this object is evidence of thought. And then there's a lineage of those objects. So I think what is fascinating is that you put it much more elegantly, but the barrier between life and non life is accruing enough memories to then actuate. So what that means is there are contingency, there are things that happen in the universe, get trapped, these memories then have a causal effect on the future. And then when you get those concentrated in a machine, you're actually able in real time able to integrate the past, the present with the future and do stuff. That's when you are most alive. You being the machine? Yes. Wait a minute. Why is the object, so one of the ways to define life, as Sarah said, is simple machines creating complex machines. So there's a million questions there. So how the hell does a simple machine create a complex machine? My mutation. So this is what we were talking about at the beginning, you have a minimum replicator, so molecule. So this is what I was trying to convince Sarah of the mechanism get there years ago, I think, but then you've been building on it and saying, you have a small, you have a molecule that can copy itself. But then that has there has to be some variability. Otherwise, it's not going to get more functional. So you need about add bits on. So you have a minimum molecule that can copy itself. But then it can add bits on and that can be copied as well. And those add ons can give you additional function to be able to acquire more stuff to exist. So existence is weird. But the fact that there is existence is why there is life. And that's why I realized a few days ago, that there must be that's why alien life must be everywhere. Because there is existence. Is there like a conservation of cheeky stuff happening? So like, how can you keep injecting more complex things? Like, doesn't the machine that creates the object need to be as or more more powerful than the things it creates? So how can you get complexity from simplicity? So the way you get complexity from simplicity is that you I wouldn't miss, I'm just making this up. But this is kind of my notion that you have a large volume of stuff. So you're able to get seeds, if you like random cues from the environment. So you just use those objects to basically write on your tape ones and zeros, whatever. And that is that is necessarily rich, complex, okay. But it has a low assembly ness. But even though it has a high assembly number, we can talk about that. But then when you start to then integrate that all into smaller volume, as over time, and you become more autonomous, you then make the transition. I don't know what you think about that. I think the easiest way to think about it is actually, which I know is a concept you hate, but I also hate which is entropy, but people are more familiar with entropy than what we talked about in assembly theory. And also the idea that, like, say physics, as we know it, involves objects that don't exist across time, or as we would say, low memory objects. So one of the key distinctions that that low memory objects, physicists are low memory objects, physicists are creators of low memory objects or manipulators of low memory objects. Absolutely. It's a very nice way of putting it. Okay, sorry, sorry to interrupt. I like it too. It's very funny. But I think it's a good way of phrasing it. Because I think, you know, this kind of idea we have in assembly theory is that, you know, physics, as we know it, has basically removed time as being a physical observable of an object. And the argument I would make is that when you look at things like water bottles, or us, we're actually things that exist that have a large extent in time. So we actually have a physical size and time. And we measure that with something called the assembly index in molecules. But presumably everyone should have do you want to explain what assembly? Yeah, let's you know what, let's step back and and start at the beginning. What is assembly theory? Lee sent me some slides. There's a there's a big sexy paper coming out probably. Maybe I don't know. We've finished it. Almost almost. That's also a summary of science. We're almost done. Yes. We're almost done. I think we are ready to start an interesting discussion with our peers. Right. You're the machine that created the object and we'll see what the object takes us. All right. So what what is assembly theory? Yeah, well, I think I think the easiest way for people to understand it is to think about assembly and molecules, although the theory is very general doesn't just apply to molecules. And this was really Lee's insight. So it's kind of funny that I'm explaining it. But Mark you. Okay. All right. I'm ready. I'm ready. I'm ready. You tell me where I get the check my marks minus, but it's your theory as well. Yeah, I know. But imagine a molecule and then and then you can break the molecule part into elementary building blocks. They happen to be bonds. And then you can think of all the ways for molecular assembly theory, you can think of all the ways of building up the original molecules. So there's all these paths that you can assemble it. And the sort of rules or assembly is you can use pieces that have been generated already. So it has this kind of recursive property to it. And so that's where kind of memory comes into assembly theory. And then the assembly index is the shortest path in that space. So it's supposed to be the minimal amount of history that the universe has to undergo in order to assemble that particular object. And the reason that this is significant is we figured out how to measure that with a mass spec in the lab. And we had this conjecture that if that minimal number of steps was sufficiently large, it would indicate that you required a machine or a system that had information about how to assemble that specific object because the combinatorial space of possibilities is getting exponentially large as the assembly index is increasing. So just sorry to interrupt, but so that means there's a sufficiently high assembly index that if observed in an object is an indicator that something life like created it or is the object itself life like? Both. But you might want to make the distinction that a water bottle is not life, but it would still be a signature that you were in that domain of physics and I might be alive. So there will be potentially a lot of arguments about where the line which assembly index does interesting stuff start to happen. The point is we can make all the arguments, but it should be experimentally observable and Lee can talk more about that part of it. But the point I want to make about it is there was always this intuition that I had that there should be some complexity threshold in the universe above which you would start to say whatever physics governs life actually becomes operative. And I think about it a little bit like we have planks constant which you know like and we have the fine structure constant and then this sort of assembly threshold is basically another sort of potentially constant of nature. It might depend on specific features of the system, but which we debate about sometimes. But then when you're past that you have to have some other explanation than the current explanations we have in physics because now you're in high memory. Things actually require time for them to exist and time becomes a physical variable. The path to the creation of the object is the memory. So you need to consider that. Yeah, but the point is that's a feature of the object. So when I think of all the things in this room, we see the projection of them as a water bottle, but assembly theory would say that this is a causal graph of all the ways the universe can create this thing. That's what it is as an object and we're all interacting a causal graph and most of the creativity and the biosphere is because a lot of the objects that exist now are huge in their structure across time four billion years of evolution to get to us. Is it possible to look at me and infer the history that led to me? You as an individual might be hard. You as a representative of a population of objects that have high assembly with similar causal history and structure that you can communicate with, i.e. other humans, you can infer a lot probably. Which we do genomically even. I mean, it's not like we have a lot of information in us we can reconstruct histories from. Assembly is saying something slightly deeper. Yeah, one thing to add, I mean, it's not just about the object but the objects that occur and not just objects with high assembly number because you can have random things that have a high assembly number, but they must have, there must be a number of identical copies. So you know you're getting away from the random, because you could take a snapshot. This is why, it's not like entropy, I love entropy, I mean, used correctly, but it's about the problem of entropy is you have to have a laborer. And so you can label the beginning and the end to start and the finish, you know. What you can do in assembly is say, oh, I have a number of objects in abundance, they all have these features and then you can infer. And one of the things that we debated a lot, particularly during lockdown, because I almost went insane trying to crush the, produce the assembly equation. So we came up with the assembly equation I had, just imagine this, so you have this string where, oh, actually it makes me, makes me sick trying to remember it. It was so, it did my head in for a long time. Yeah, because I couldn't, so if you just have a string of say words, say, you know, a series of words, series of letters, so you just have aa, bbb, ccc, ddd, and you find that object and you just have four a's, four b's, four c's, four d's together, boom. Then, and that, that you measured that, you physically measured that string of letters. Then what you could do is you can infer sub graphs of maybe the four a's, the four b's, the four c's, and four c's, but you don't see them in the real world, you just infer them. And I really got stuck with that because there's a problem to try and work out what's the difference between a long, you know, physical object in this assembly space of objects that we realized the best way to put that is infer in time that so although we can't infer your entire history, we know at some point the four a's were made, the four b's were made, the four c's were made, the four d's were made, and they all got added together. And that's one really interesting thing that's come out of the theory. But the killer, when we knew we were going beyond standard complexity theory, which was incredibly successful, is that we realized we could start to measure these things for real across domains. So the assembly index is actually an intrinsic property of all stuff that you can break into components, particularly molecules are good because you can break them up into smaller molecules into atoms. The challenge will be making that more general across all the domains, but we're working on it right now. And I think the theory will do that. So components, domains, so you're talking about basically measuring the complexity of an object in what biology, chemistry, physics, that's what you mean by domains. Complexity of testors, sociology, computers, complexity of memes, you know. Memes? What is that? Ideas? Yeah, I mean, so one of the... Ideas are objects in assembly theory. Yeah. They are. They're physical things. They're just features of the causal graph. I mean, the fact I can talk to you right now is because we're exchanging structure of our assembly space. So conversation is the exchanging structures in assembly space. What is assembly space? When I started working on origins of life, I was writing about something called top-down causation, which a lot of philosophers are interested in and people that worry about the mind-body problem. But the whole idea is if we have the microscopic world of physics is causally complete, it seems like there's no room for higher-level causes, like our thoughts to actually have any impact on the world. And that seems problematic when you get to studying life and mind because it does seem that, quote-unquote, emergent properties do matter to matter. And then there's this other sort of paradoxical situation where information looks like it's disembodied. So we talk about information. It can just move from any physical system to any other physical system. And it doesn't require... You don't have to specify anything about the substrate to talk about information. And then there's also... The way we talk about mathematics is also disembodied, right? Like the platonic world of forms. And I think all of those things are hinging that we really don't know how to think about abstractions as physical things. And really, I think what assembly theory is pointing to is what we're missing there is the dimension of time. And if you actually look at an object being extended across time, what we call information and the things that look abstract are things that are entangled in the histories of those objects. They're features of the overlapping assembly space. So they look abstract because they're not part of the current structure, but they're part of the structure if you thought about it as the philosophical concept of a hyper object, an object that's too big in time for us to actually to resolve. And so I think information is physical. It's just physical in time, not in space. Two hyper objects too difficult for us to resolve. So we're supposed to think about life as this thing that stretches through time and there's a causation chain that led to that thing. And then you're trying to measure something with the assembly index about... The assembly index is the ordering. You could think of it as a partial ordering of all the things that can happen. So in thermodynamics, we coarse grain things by temperature and pressure. In assembly theory, we coarse grain by the number of copies of an object and the assembly index, which is basically, if you think of the space of all possible things, it's like a depth of how far you've gone into that space and how much time was required to get there. In the shortest possible version. Not average, because can't you just 3D print the thing? You're going to kill me with that question. Oh, not 3D. Can't you always 3D print the thing? You have it in the heart. No, because I had such fights. So Sarah's team and my team are writing this paper at the moment. And it's so funny. I think we kind of share the at the beginning, you were like, no, that's not right. Oh, that's right. And we're doing this for a bit. And then the problem is we build a theory and build the intuition. There's some certain features, right, of the theory that almost felt like I was being religious about say, right, you have to do this. A good assembly theorist does this, does this, does this and Sarah's postdoc Daniel and my postdoc Abhishek. And they were both brilliant. They're brilliant. But they were like, no, we don't we don't buy that. It is is they were like, well, Lee, actually, I thought you're the first to say that, you know, you can't if you can't explain it doesn't and you can't do an experiment that doesn't exist. And that saved me. And I said to Abhishek, Abhishek's my postdoc in Glasgow, Daniel is Sarah's postdoc in ASU. I was like, I have the experimental data. So when I basically take the molecules and chop them up in the mass spec, the assembly number is never the average is always the shortest, it's an intrinsic property. And then the penny dropped for Abhishek said, okay, because I had these things that we had to believe to start with or to trust. And then we've done the math and it comes out and they now have the shortest path actually is up that explains why the shortest path is important, not the average. Shortest path needs you to identify when the universe is basically got a memory, not an average. So what you want to do is to say, what is the minimum number of features that I want to be able to see in the universe, when I find those features, I know the universe has had a coherent memory, and it's basically alive. And, and so that gives you the lower bound. So that's like, of course, there's going to be other paths, we can be more ridiculous, right? We can have other parts, but it's just the minimum. So probabilistically, at the beginning, because assembly theory was built as a measure for biosignatures, I needed to go there. And then I realized it was intrinsic. And then Sarah realized it was intrinsic and these hyper objects were coming and we were kind of fusing that notions together. And then the team were like, yeah, but if I have enough energy, and I have enough resources, I might not take the shortest path, I might go a bit longer, I might take a really long path, because it allows me then to, to do something else. So what you do is, let's say I've got two different objects, A and B, and they both have different shortest paths to get them. But then if you want to make A and B together, they will have a compromise. So in the joint assembly space, they might that might be an average, but actually it's the shortest way you can make both A and B with a minimum amount of resource in time. So suddenly, you then layer these things up. And so the average becomes not important, but it's a, as you literally overlap those sets, you get a new shortest path. And so what we realized time and time again, when we're doing the math, the shortest path is intrinsic, is fundamental, and is measurable, which is kind of mind blowing. So what we're talking about some basic ingredients, maybe we'll talk about that, what those basic ingredients could be and how many steps, when you say shortest path, how many steps it takes to turn those basic ingredients into the final meal. So how to make a pizza, what's the shortest way to make a pizza? Or a pie. And apple pie. That's right. And the pizza and the pie together. Scratch. Yeah. So there's a lot of ways. There's the shortest way and you take the full spectrum of ways and there's probably an average, like duration for a noob to make an apple pie. Is the average interesting still? If you measure the average length of the path to assemble a thing, does that tell you something about the way nature usually does it? Versus something fundamental about the object, which I think is what you're aiming at with the assembly index. Yeah. I mean, look, we will have to quantify things. The minimum path gives you the lower bounds. You know, you're detecting something, you know, you're inferring something. The average tells you about really how the objects are existing in the ecosystem or the technology. And there has to be more paths explored because then you can happen upon other memories and then condense them down. I'm not making too much sense. But if you look and say, let's just say, I mean, maybe we're going to get to alien civilizations later, right? But I would argue very strongly that alien civilization A and alien civilization B, they're different assembly spaces. So they're kind of going to be a bit messed up if they happen to come on another. Only when they find some joint overlap in their technology, because if aliens come to us and they don't share any of the causal graph, we've shared it, but hopefully they share the periodic table and bonds and things. So we're going to have to really think about the language to talk to aliens by using assembly theory to infer their language, their technology, and other bits and bobs. And the shortest path will help you do that quickly. All right. So all aliens in the causality graphs have a common sense of the way that they have a common ancestor in the... If the building blocks are the same, which means they live in the same universe as us. It depends on how far back in time you go, though. But the universe has all the same building blocks. Yeah. And we have to assume that. So there's not different classes of causality graphs, right? No. The universe doesn't just say, like, here, you get the red causality graph, then you get the blue one. These basic ingredients, and they're geographically constrained, or constrained in space or time or something like that. They're constrained in time because only by the virtue of the fact that you need enough time to have passed for some things to exist. So the universe has to be big enough in time for some things. So just the one point on the shortest path versus the average path, which I think will get to this is you had a nice way of saying it's like the minimal compression is the shortest path for the universe to produce that. But it's also the first time in the ordering of events that you might expect to see that object. But the average path tells you something about the actual steps that were realized, and that becomes an emergent property of that object's interaction with other objects. So it's not an intrinsic feature of that object. It's a feature of the interactions with other things. And so one of the nice features of assembly is you've basically gotten rid of, you just look at the things that exist, and you've gotten rid of the mechanisms for constructing them in some sense, like the machines are not as important in the current construction of the theory, although I would like to bridge it to some ideas about constructors. But then you could only communicate with things as Lee was saying, if you have some overlap in the past history. So if you had an alien species that had absolutely no overlap, then there would be no means of communication. But as we become, you know, as we progress further and further in time, and more things become possible, because the assembly spaces are larger, because you can have a larger assembly space in terms of index and also just the size of the space because it's exponentially growing, then more things can happen in the future. And the example I like to give is actually when we made first contact with gravitational waves, because, you know, that's an alien phenomena that's been permeating our planet, not alien in life, but alien, like something we had never knew existed. It's been, you know, like, we're, you know, there's gravitational waves rippling through this room right now. But we had to advance to the level of Einstein writing down his theory of relativity, and then 100 years of technological development to even quote unquote, see that phenomena. So the okay, to see that phenomena, our causal graph has to start intersecting. Yeah, we needed the idea to emerge first, the abstraction, right? And then we had to build the technology that could actually observe features of that abstraction. So the nice promising thing is, over time, the graph can grow, so we can start overlapping eventually. Yeah. So the interesting feature of that graph is there was an event, you know, 1.4 billion years away of a black hole merger that we detected on our detector. And, you know, now suddenly we're connected through this communication channel with this distant event in our universe, that, you know, if you think about 1.4 billion years ago, what was happening on this planet, or even further back in time, that, you know, there's common physics underlying all those events, but even for those two events to communicate with, I understand what you were going on about the other week. Yeah, I'm sorry. Yeah, really abstract example. But, but it's causal graphs are not overlapping. Well, let's just say now our causal graphs are overlapping in the deep past. Yeah, no, I like it. So you made it. Yeah, you made a connection with it. Now I do like that. No, no, you can tell me what your epiphany is now. That's good. Because I was and I should get the jokes before 30 seconds after. So, oh, I get it now. No, sorry, I'm slow on the uptake. I wasn't able to comprehend what you were talking about, when saying the channel communicating to the past. But what you're saying is, we were able to infer what happened 1.4 billion years ago. We don't take to the gravity wave. I mean, I think it's amazing that, you know, that time we weren't even we were just becoming multicellular, right? It's like insane. And then we we we progress to multicellularity through to technology, technology, and build the detector and then for you know, and then we're just extrapolate backwards. So, so although we haven't didn't do anything back to the graph back in time, we understood his existence then overlapped going forward. And that's because our graphs are larger. Yeah, but that means that has a consequence. One of the things I was trying to say is like, I'm, I'm, I'm, I think, I don't know, Sarah might be, she can correct me information first, and I'm a object first kind of guy. So I mean, there's things that get constructed, there has to be this transition in random constructions. So when the constructing the object that's constructed being constructed by the process, bakes in that memory, and those memories, then add on and add on and add on. So, as it becomes more competent in life is about taking those memories and compressing them increasing their autonomy. And, and so I think that, you know, like the cell that we have in biology on Earth is our way of doing that that really the maximum ability to take memories and to act on the future. Oh, I think that's mathematics. No, mathematics doesn't exist. No, but that's the point. The point is that abstractions do exist. They're real physical things. We call them. Okay, abstractions. But the point about mathematics that I think is so I don't I don't disagree. I think you're object first, and I'm information first. But I think I'm, I'm only information first, in the sense that I think the thing that we need to explain is why what abstractions are and what they are as physical things because of all of human history, we've thought that there were these properties that are disembodied exist outside of the universe. And really, they do exist in the universe. And we just don't understand what their physics is. So I think mathematics is a really good example. We do theoretical physics with math, but imagine doing physics of math, and then thinking about math as a physical object. And math is super interesting. I think this is why we think it describes reality so well, because it's the most copyable kind of information, it retains its properties when you move it between physical media, which means that it's very deep. And so it seems to describe the universe really well, but it probably is because it's information that's very deep in our past. And it's just, we invented a way of communicating it very effectively between us. It isn't math more fundamental, isn't the assembly of the graph, isn't basically, I'm going to say, I sound completely boring. It's like math, assembly theory invented math, but it did. It has to be. Okay. So what is math exactly? It's a nice, nice simplification, a simple description of what? So we have a computer scientist, a physicist, and a chemist here. Walking to a bar. I think the chemist is going to define math, and you guys can correct me. Go for it. I would say- Let's lay it honestly. We're ready. I think the ability to label objects and place them into classes and then do operations on the objects is what math is. So on that point, what does it mean to be object first versus information first? So what's the difference between object and information when you get to that low fundamental level? Well, I might change my view. So I'm stuff first, the stuff. And then when stuff becomes objects, it has to invent information. And then the information acts on more stuff and becomes more objects. So I think there is a transition to information that occurs when you go from stuff to objects. I just mean time though. Yeah. Information is emergent. Not emergent. Information is actionable memories from the universe. So when memories become actionable, that's information. But there's always memory, but it's not actionable. Yeah. And then it's not information. Great. Actionable is what you can create. You can use it. If you can't use it, then it's not information. If you can't transmit it, if it doesn't have any causal consequence. Falls in the forest. I don't understand. Why is that not information? It's not information. It's stuff happening, but it's not causal. Yeah, we can... It's happening. No, I know. That happening requires information. No, no, no, no, no. Stuff is always happening. No. This is where the physicists and the mathematicians get themselves in a loop, because they think the universe... I mean, I think say Max Tegmark, and it's very playful and say like the universe, the universe is just math. Well, the universe is just math. Then we might as well not bother having any conversation, because the conversation will be written. We just might as well go to the future and say, can you just give us the conversations? Happened already. So I think the problem is that mathematicians are so successful at labeling stuff, and so successful understanding stuff through those labels. They forget that actually those labels had to emerge, and that information had to be built on those memories. So memory in the universe, so constraints, graph. When they become actionable and the graph can loop back on itself, or interact with other graphs, and they can intersect, those memories become actionable and therefore their information. And I think you just changed my mind on something pretty big, but I don't have a pen, so I'm going to write it down later. But roughly the idea is like you've got these two graphs of objects, of stuff. They have memories. And then when they intersect, and then they can act on each other, that's maybe the mechanism by which information is then, so then you can then abstract. So when one graph can then build another graph and say, hey, you don't have to go through the nonsense we had to go through. Here's literally the way to do it. Stuff always comes first, but then when stuff builds the abstraction, the abstraction can be then teleported onto other stuff. And the abstraction is the looping back to power. Okay. Am I making, I don't know, I got stuck. Yeah, so first, a God made stuff. Oh yeah. Then after that, when you start to be able to form abstractions, that's when... God is the memory the universe can remember. God is the memory the universe can remember. Otherwise there's no... We're not going to deciphering that statement hundreds of years from now. What the hell does that mean? What does the humans mean by this? Don't diss my one-liners. I know, I wasn't dissed in it. It took me 15 seconds to come up with that. I don't know what it means. What does it mean? Yeah. Okay, wait. How do we get onto this? We were time causality mathematics. So what is mathematics in this picture of stuff, objects, memory, and information? What is that? It's mathematics. It's the most efficient labeling scheme that you can apply to lots of different graphs. Well, the labeling scheme doesn't make it sound useful. Can I try? Yeah, sure, please. Have you rejected my definition of mathematics? I'm shocked. But it's correct. Go on, sorry. Excellent. No, I mean, I think we have a problem, right? Because we can't not be us. We're stuck in the shells we are and we're trying to observe the world. And so mathematics looks like it has certain properties. And I guess the thought experiment I find is useful is to try to imagine if you were outside of us looking at us as physical systems using mathematics, what would be the specific features you associate to the property of understanding mathematics and being able to implement it in the universe, right? And when you do that, mathematics seems to have some really interesting properties relative to other kinds of abstraction we might talk about, like language or artistic expression. And one of those properties is the one I mentioned already that is really easy to copy between physical media. So if I give you a mathematical statement, you almost immediately know what I mean. If I tell you the sky is blue, you might say, is it cobalt blue? Is it is your blue? What color blue do you mean? And you have a harder time visualizing what I actually mean. So mathematics carries a lot of meaning with it when it's copied between physical systems. It's also the reason we use it to communicate with computers. And then the second one is it retains its property of actually what it can do in the universe when it's copied. So the example I like to give there is think about Newton's law of gravitation. It's actually a compressed regularity of a bunch of phenomena that we observe in the universe. But then that information actually is a causal in a sense that it allows us to do things we wouldn't be able to do without that particular knowledge and that particular abstraction. And in this case, launch satellites to space or send people to Mars or whatever it is. So if you look at us from the outside and you say, what is it for physical systems to invent a thing called mathematics and then to use and then it to become a physical observable, mathematics is kind of like the universally copyable information that allows new possibility spaces to be open in the future because it allows this kind of ability to map one physical system to another and actually understand that the general principle. So is it helping the overlap of causal graphs then by mapping? Oh, I think that's the explanation for what it is in terms of the physical theory of assembly would be some feature of the structure of the assembly spaces of causal graphs and their relationship to each other. So for example, and I mean, this is things that we're going to have to work out over the next few years. I mean, we're in totally uncharted conceptual territory here. But as as usual, diving off the deep end. But I would expect that we would be able to come up with a theory of like, why is it that some physical systems can communicate with each other? Like language, language is basically because we're objects extended over time and some of the history of that assembly space actually overlaps. And when we communicate, it's because we actually have shared structure in our causal history. Let me have another quick go at this. Right. So I think we all agree. So I think we take mathematics for granted because we've gone through this chain, right? You know, we all share a language now. Okay. And we can we share length. So we have languages that we can we can make interoperable. And so whether you're speaking, I don't know, all the different dialects of Chinese, all the different dialects of English, French, German, whatever, you can interconvert them. The interesting thing about mathematics now is that everybody on planet Earth, every human being and computers share that common language. Common language, that language was constructed by a process in time. So what I'm trying to say is assembly invented math is those those right from the, you know, mathematics didn't occur, didn't exist before life abstraction was invented by life. Right. That doesn't mean that the universe wasn't capable of mathematical things. Wait a minute. Can we just ask that that old famous question is math invented or discovered? So when you say assembly invented or whatever, you mean simply mathematical theory, but sorry. Right. Are we arguing? Exactly. Are we arguing now? That's what it sounds like. Are we discovering? No. Well, yes and no. I would say. You call mathematics a language. I would say that. Like, I'm pretty sure that there there are some very common seeds of mathematics in the universe. Right. But actually, not the mathematics that we are finding now is not discovered. It's invented. But even though I think those two terms are very triggering and I don't think they're necessarily useful because I think that what people do, the mathematicians that say our mathematics was discovered because they live in a universe where there is no time and it just all exists. But what I'm saying is, and I think in the same way you can create, let's say I'm going to go and create and make a piece of art. Did I make that piece of art or did I discover it? Like inventing the airplane. Did I invent the airplane? Let's stick with the airplane. The airplane is a good one. Let's say I did I discover the airplane? Well, in a way, the universe discovered the airplane because it just chucked a load of atoms together and a load of random human beings. We want to do stuff and then we discover the airplane in the space of possibilities. But here's the thing. When the space of possibilities is so vast, infinite almost, and you're able to actualize one of those in an object and you are inventing it. So in mathematics, because there are infinite number of theorems, the fact you're actually pulling, there's no difference between inventing a mathematical structure and inventing the airplane. They're the same thing. But that doesn't mean that now the airplane exists in the universe. It's something weird about the universe. So I think that the more memory required for the object, the more invented it is. So when a mathematical theorem needs more bytes to store it, the more invented it is and the less bytes the more discovered it is. But everything then is invented. It's just more or less invented. Absolutely. The universe has to generate everything as it goes. Yeah. Yeah. And it wasn't there in the beginning. And the way we're thinking it, when you're thinking about the difference between invent and discover it is because we're throwing away all the memory. Yeah. So if you start to think in terms of causality and time, then those things become the same. Everything is invented. And the idea is to make everything intrinsic to the universe. So I think one of the features of assembly theory is we don't want to have external observers. There's been this long tradition in physics of trying to describe the universe from the outside and not the inside. And the universe has to generate everything itself if you do it from the inside. Assembly theory describes how the universe builds itself. Did it take you 15 seconds to say that? Yeah. To come up with that also? No, I've thought of that before. Okay. A good line. It's like- Oh, you're making fun again. No, I'm not making fun. I'm having fun. There's a difference. Oh, that's good. All right. I'm- She's inventing fun. I'm not all intimidated. Yes. And there's a causal history of how I did that. Fun. You mentioned that there's no way to communicate with aliens until there's overlap in the causal graph. Communication includes being able to see them. And like what are we- This is the question is, is communication any kind of detection? And if so, what do aliens look like as you get more and more overlap on the causal graph? You're assuming- Let's assume that aliens- So when you see them and they see you, you're assuming they have vision. They have the ability to construct in 3D and in time. There's a lot of assumptions we're making. What detection? All right. Let's step back. So yes. Okay. You're right. So when in the English language, when we say the word see, we mean visually, they show up to a party and it's like, oh, wow, that's an alien. That's visual. That's 3D. That's- Okay. And that's also assuming scale, spatial scale of something that's visible to you. So it can't be microscopic or it can't be so big that you don't even realize that's an entity. Okay. But other kinds of detection too. I would make it more abstract and go down. I was thinking this morning about how to rewrite the Arecibo message in assembly theory, and also to abandon binary. Because I don't think aliens necessarily- Why should they have binary? Well, they have some basic elements with which to do information exchange. Why? Let's make it more fundamental, more universal. So we need to think about what is the universal way of making a memory, and then we should re-encode Arecibo in that way. What's more basic than zeros and ones? Well, it's really difficult to get out that causal chain because we're so- So let's embrace the idea of zero for a moment. It took human beings a long time to come up with the idea of zero. Now you've got the idea of zero. You can't throw it away. It's so useful. To discover the idea of zero. To discover and invent. I don't know, but it took a long time. So it was invented. That's right. Yeah, I think zero was invented. Exactly. So it's not given that aliens know what zero is. It's just the one. Massive assumption. It's a useful discovery. You're saying if you break the causal chain, there might be some other more efficient way of- That's why I want to meet them and ask them. For a shortcut. But you won't be able to ask them until- Well, so I interrupted you and I think you're making good point. I was just going to say, well, look- Thank you. Sorry. Rather than saying- Please, internet, tweet at him for the rude interruptions. Go ahead. I'm sorry. No, it's okay. Maybe it's change. How do we say, oh, I don't know what it's like to be an alien. I would like to know. What is the full spectrum of what aliens might look like to us? Now that we've laid this all on the table of like, all right, so there has to be some overlap in this causal chain that led to them. What are we looking for? What do you think we should be looking for? So you mentioned mass spec measuring certain objects that aliens could create, or are aliens themselves? We show up to a planet or maybe not a planet, or maybe what the hell is the basic object we're trying to measure? Well, let's cut ourselves a break. Let's assume that they're metabolite. They've got an energy source, and there are a size that we can recognize. Let's give ourselves a break, because there could be aliens that are so big, we won't recognize we're seeing them. There might be aliens that are so small, we don't yet have the ability to, you know, we don't have microscopes that can see far enough away, that just won't be able to see them. So what's a good range? So let's just make a range. Let's just be very anthropocentric and say we're going to look for aliens roughly our size, and technology our size, because we know it's possible on Earth, right? I mean, a reasonable thing to do would be to find exoplanets in the same zone as Earth, in terms of heat and stuff, and then say, hey, if there's that same kind of gravity, same kind of stuff, we could reasonably assume that alien life there might use a similar kind of physical infrastructure, infrastructure, and then we're good. So then your question becomes really relevant, say, right, let's use vision, sound, touch. Okay, that's really nice. So if there's a lot of aliens out there, there's a good likelihood, if you match to the planet, that they're going to be in the same spatial and temporal, operating in the same spatial and temporal domain as humans. Okay, within that, what do they look like visually? What do they sound like? What do they... Oh, god, this sounds creepy. Taste like? What do they smell like? Smell like that's the sound. It sounds like our clubhouse, and he's like, can we have sex with aliens? Which was basically me saying... Passionate, passionate love. But it wasn't actually about sex, it was about, is our chemistry compatible, right? Is there some... Yeah, can we... Yeah. Are they edible too? That could be very edible, they could be delicious. That's why I want to see some aliens, right? Because I think, are there... I think evolution... I mean, evolution exploits symmetry, right? Because why generate memory? Why generate storage, the need for storage space, when you can use symmetry? And symmetry is maybe quite effective in allowing you to mechanically design stuff, right? So maybe you could be reasonable to assume that aliens could have... They could be bipedal, they could be symmetric in the same way, might have a couple of eyes, or a couple of senses. I mean, we can make that, and perhaps there's this whole zoo of different aliens out there, and we'll never get to be able to classify some of the weird aliens we can't interact with, because they have made such weird stuff. But we are just going to look at... We're going to find aliens that look most like us. Why not? Because those are the first ones we're likely to see. Yeah. Yeah. But I think it's really hard to imagine what the space of aliens is, because the space is huge. Because one of the arguments that you can make about wildlife emerges in chemistry is because chemistry is the first scale in terms of building up objects from elementary objects, that the number of possible things that could exist is larger than the universe can possibly make all at once, right? So imagine you have two planets, and they're cooking some geochemistry. Our planet invented one kind of biochemistry, and presumably, as you start building up the complexity of the molecules, the chances of the overlap in those trajectories, those causal chains being built up, is probably very low. And it gets lower and lower as it gets further advanced along its evolutionary path. So I think it's very difficult to imagine predicting the technologies that aliens are going to have. I mean, it's so... You're looking at basically... Planets have kind of convergent chemistry, but there's some variability, and then you're looking basically at the outgrowth into the possibility space for chemistry. So do you think it would detect the technology, the objects created by aliens before we detect the aliens? Possibly. So when you're talking about measuring assembly index, don't you think we would detect the garbage first? Like at the outskirts of alien civilizations, this is going to be trash. I think I will come back to Arecibo. The Arecibo message sent from the Arecibo telescope, built by Drake, I think, and Sagan. How is Arecibo spelled? A-R-E-C-I-B-O. Yes. A-R-E-C-I-B-O. And there we go. They've got it up there. That's the telescope that sent the message that you're talking about. So that message was sent where? It was beamed at a star, a specific star, and it was sent out many years ago. And what they did... So this is why it's pushing on binary. It's a binary message. I think it's a semi-prime length number of characters. So I think it's 73 by 23, I think. And it basically represents human protons, binary, human beings, DNA, male and female. And it's really cool. But I'm just wondering if it could be done not making any... Because it made assumptions that aliens speak binary. Why not make that assumption? Why not just assume that if the difference between physics, chemistry, and biology is the amount of memory that's recordable by the substrate, then surely the universal thing... I'm going to make some sacrilegious statement, which I think is pretty awesome for people to argue with. So this is... We're looking at an image where it's the entirety of the message encoded in binary. And then there's probably interpretation of different parts of that image. There's a person. There's green parts. It looks like for people just listening, like a game of Tetris. Encoding in minimal ways, a bunch of cool information probably. Representing all of us. So the topic is kind of teaching us how to count. And then it all goes all the way down, teaching you chemistry. And then it just says... But it makes so many assumptions. And I think if we can actually... Sarah's much more eloquent expressing this, but I'll have a go and you can correct it if you want. Which is like one of the things that Sarah has had a profound effect on the way I look at the origin of life. And this is one of the reasons why we're working together. Because we don't really care about the origin of life. We want to make life, make aliens, and find aliens. Make aliens, find aliens. I think we might have to make aliens in the lab before we find aliens in the universe, right? I think that would be a cool way to do it. So what is it about the universe that creates aliens? Well, it's selection through assembly theory, creating memories. Because when you create memories, you can then command your domain. You can basically do stuff. You can command matter. So we need to find a way by understanding what life is, of how the minimal way to command matter, how that would emerge in the universe. And if we want to communicate, I mean, maybe we don't want to necessarily uniformly communicate. What I would do perhaps if I had... Is I would send out lots of probes away from Earth that have this magic way of communicating with aliens. Get them quite a far away from Earth. That's just a little bit of a laugh. Plauseably deniable. And then send out the message that would then attract all the aliens. And then basically work out if they were a friend or foe and how they want to hang out. The messages being something has to do with the memories. Yes. Like the assembly version of Arecibo. So that everyone in the universe that understands what life is. So aliens need to work out what they are. Once they've worked out what they are, they then can work out how to encode what they are. And then they can go out and send messages. The universal, the Rosetta Stone for life in the universe is working out how the memories are built. I don't know, Sarah, you have any... Well, I don't... Whether that... You would agree with that. No, I wanted to raise a different point, which is about the fact that we can't see the aliens yet because we haven't gotten the technology. And presumably we think assembly theory is the right way of doing it. But I don't think that we know how to go from the kind of data you're describing, Lex, like visual data or smell, to construct the assembly spaces yet. And in some ways, I think that the problem of life detection really is the same problem at the foundations of AI that we don't understand how to get machines to see causal graphs, to see reality in terms of causation. And so I think assembly and AI are gonna intersect in interesting ways, hopefully. But the sort of key point, and I've been trying to make this argument more recently, and might write an essay on it, is people talk about the great filter, which is again this like doomsday thing that people wanna say there's no aliens out there because something terrible happened to them. And it matters whether that's in our past or our future as to the longevity of our species, presumably, which is why people find it interesting. But I think it's not a physical filter. It's not like things go extinct. I think it's literally we don't have the technology to see them. And you could see that with microscopes. I mean, we didn't know there were microscopes on this table for our tables for thousands of years or telescopes. There's so much of the universe we can't see. And then basically what we have done as a species is outsource our physical perceptions to technology, building microscopes based on our eyes, and building size monitors based on our sense of feelings, like feel earthquakes and things. And AI is basically we're trying to outsource what's actually happening in our thinking apparatus into machines now and technological devices. And maybe that's the key technology that's going to allow us to see things like us and see the universe in a totally different way. But you kind of mentioned the great filter. Do you think there's a way through technology to stop being able to see stuff? So can you take a step backwards? I think so, yeah. Did you imply that with the great... So like... Well, no, I mean, I think there's a great perceptual filter in the sense that a example of life evolving on a planet over billions of years has to acquire a certain amount of knowledge and technology to actually recognize the phenomena that it is. Well, that's the sense I have is... You talk with physicists, engineers in general. There's this kind of idea that we have most of the tools already to hear the signal. But to me, it feels like we don't have any of the tools to see the signal. Yeah, I agree. That's the biggest, like to hear. We don't have the tools to really hear, to see. Yeah. Aliens are everywhere. We just don't have the... Exactly. The... Yeah, I mean, well... I mean, I got this in part actually, because you were like, you know, last time I was here, I was like, look at the carpet. You know, could it like, if you had an alien detector, would the carpet be aliens? I mean, I think we really don't. It would be, but aliens would nevertheless have a high assembly index or produce things of high assembly index. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And those things of a high assembly index, you have to have a detector that can recognize high assembly index in all its forms. Yeah. Yes. That's it. That's it. Take data, construct assembly space. Yes, patterns basically. So one way to think about high assembly index is interesting patterns, all of basic ingredients. I can give you an example, because I mean, in molecules, we've been talking about in objects, but we're also trying to do it in spatial trajectories. Like imagine you're just... Like I always get bothered by the fact that like, when you look at birds flocking, you can describe that with like a simple boys model or like, you know, people use spin glass to describe animal behavior. And those are like really simple physics models. Yet you're looking at a system that you know has agency and there's intelligence in those birds. And basically, like you can't help but think there must be some statistical signatures of the fact that there... That's a group of agents versus, you know, like, I don't know, the physics example, maybe like, I don't know, Brownian motion or something. And so what we're trying to do is actually apply assembly to trajectory data to try to say there's a minimal amount of causal history to build up certain trajectories for observed agents as like an agency detector for behavior. Do you think it's possible to do some like, like, boards or those kinds of things, like artificial, like cellular automata, play with those ideas with assembly theory? Have you found any useful, really simple mathematical like simulation tools that allow you to play with these concepts? So like one, of course, you're doing mass spec in this physical space with chemistry, but it just seems, well, I mean, computer science person, maybe. It seems easier to just... I agree with you. And sexier in terms of tweeting visual information on Twitter or Instagram, more importantly, to play like, here's an organism of a low assembly index and here's an organism of a high assembly index. And let's watch them create more and more memories and more and more complex objects. And so like, in mathematics, you get to observe what that looks like to build up an intuition what assembly index is like. We are building a toolkit right now. So I think it's a really good idea. But what we've got to do is I'm kind of still obsessed with the infrastructure required. And one of the reasons why I was pushing on information and mathematics when human beings, when human being, we take a lot of the infrastructure for granted. And I think we have to strip that back a bit for going forward. But you're absolutely right. I would agree that I think the fact that we exist in the universe, I can see that lots of people would disagree with the statement. But I don't think Sarah will. But I don't know. The fact that objects exist, I don't think anyone on Earth will disagree that objects can exist elsewhere, right? But they will disagree that life can exist elsewhere. But what perhaps I'm trying to say is that the acquisition, the universe's ability to acquire memory is the very first step for building life. And that must be that's so easy to happen. So therefore alien life is everywhere because all alien life is, is those memories being compressed and minimalized and the alien equipment of the cell working. So I think that we will build new technologies to find aliens. But we do not we need to understand what we are first and how we go from physics to chemistry to biology. The most interesting thing, as you're saying, to these two organisms, different assemblies, is when you get into biology, biology gets more and more weird, more and more contingent. Chemistry is less weird because the rules of chemistry are small in the rules of biology, and then going away to physics where you have a very nicely tangible number of ways of arranging things. And I think assembly theory just helps you appreciate that. And so once we get there, my dream is that we are just going to be able to suddenly are, I mean, I mean, I'm maybe just being really arrogant here. I'm not mean to be arrogant. It's just, again, I've got this hammer called assembly and everything's a nail. But I think that once we crack it, we'll be able to use assembly theory plus telescopes to find aliens. Do you have, Sarah, do you have disagreements with Lee on the number of aliens that are out there? Do, actually, yeah. And what they look like. So any of the things we've been talking about, is there nuanced, it's always nice to discover wisdom through nuanced disagreement. Yeah, I don't wholly disagree, but I do think I disagree. It's kind of, there's nuance there. You can disagree. No, it's fine. It is nuanced, right? So you made the point earlier that you think, once we discover what life is, we'll see alien life everywhere. And I think I agree on some levels in the sense that I think the physics that governs us is universal. But I don't know how far I would go to say to say that we're a likely phenomena because we don't understand all of the features of the transition at the origin of life, which we would say in assembly, as you go from the no memory physics to, there's like a critical transition around the assembly index where assembly and it starts to increase. And that's what we call the evolution of the biosphere and complexification of the biosphere. So there's a principle of increasing assembly. And that's where that goes back to what I was saying at the very beginning about the physics of the possible, that the universe basically gets in this mode of trying to make as much possibilities as possible. Now, how often that transition happens, that you get the kind of cascading effect that we get in our biosphere. I think we don't know if we did, we would know the likelihood of life in the universe. And a lot of people want to say life is common, but I don't think that we can say that yet till we have the empirical data, which I think you would agree with. But then there's this other kind of thought experiment I have, which I don't like, but I did have it, which is, if life emerges on one planet and you get this real high density of things that can exist on that planet, is it sort of dominating the density of creation that the universe can actually generate? So like, if you're thinking about counting entropy, like the universe has a certain amount of stuff in it, and then assembly is kind of like an entropic principle, it's not entropy. But the idea is that now transformations among stuff are the actual physical histories of things, now become things that you have to count as far as saying that these things exist and we're increasing the number of things that exist. And if you think about that cosmologically, maybe Earth is sucking up all the life potential of the whole universe, I don't know. But I have- How's that? Can you explain that a little bit? Why can anyone geographical region suck up the creative capacity of the universe? Um, just like, I know it's a ridiculous thought. I don't actually agree with it, but it was just a thought experiment. I love that you can have thoughts that you don't like and don't agree with, but you have to think through them anyway. Yeah. Because the human mind is fascinating. Yeah, I think these sort of like counterfactual thought experiments are really good when you're trying to build new theories, because you have to think through all the consequences. And there are people that want to try to account for, say, the degrees of freedom on our planet and cosmological inventories of, you know, talking about the entropy of the universe and, you know, and when we're thinking about like cosmological arrow of time and things like that. Now, I think those are pretty superficial proposals as they stand now, but assembly would give you a way of counting it. And then the question is, if there's a certain maximal capacity of the universe's speed of generating stuff, which Lee always has this argument that assembly is about time, the universe is generating more states, really what it's generating is more assembly possibilities. And then dark energy might be one manifestation of that, that the universe is accelerating its expansion, because that makes more physical space. And what's happening on our planet is it's accelerating in the expansion of possible things that exist. And maybe the universe just has a maximal rate of what it can do to generate things. And then if there is a maximal rate, maybe only a certain number of planets can actually do that, or there's a trade off about the pace of growth on certain planets versus others. Do you have a million questions there? Do you have thoughts? Just a quick, yeah, I'll just say something very quick. It's a thought experiment. No, it's good. I think I get it. I think I get it. So what I want to say is, when I mean aliens are everywhere, I mean memories are the prerequisite for aliens via selection, and then the concentration of selection when selection becomes autonomous. So what I would love to do is to build, say, a magical telescope that was a memory magical one. Yeah, that was all right. A real one. There will be a memory detector to see selection. So you could get to exoplanets and say that exoplanet looks like there's lots of selection going on there. Maybe there's evolution and maybe there's going to be life. So what I'm just trying to say is narrow down the regions of space. We can say there's definitely evidence of memory as high assembly there, or not high assembly, because that would be life, but where it's capable of happening. And then that would also help us frame the search for aliens. I don't know how likely it is to make the transition to cells and all the other things. I think you're right. But I think that we just need to get more data. Well, I didn't like the thought experiment, because I don't like the idea that if the universe has a maximal limit on the amount it can generate per unit time, that our existence is actually precluding the existence of other things. Well, I'll just say one thing. But I think that's probably true anyway, because of resource limitations. So I don't like your thought experiment, because I think it's wrong. Well, no, no, I do like the thought experiment. So what you're trying to say is like there is a chain of events that goes back that's manifestly co-emated with life on Earth. And you're not saying that life isn't possible elsewhere. You say that there has been these number of things, contingent things that have happened that have allowed life to merge here. That doesn't mean that life can't emerge elsewhere. But you're saying that these, the intersection of events may be concentrated here, right? Right. And I think that's not exactly, not exactly. It's more like, like, you know, if you look at, say, the causal graphs are fundamental, maybe space is an emergent property, which is consistent with some proposals in quantum gravity, but also how we talk about things in assembly theory, then the universe is causal graphs generating more structure and causal graphs, right? So this is how the universe is unfolding. And maybe there's a cap on the rate of generation, like there's only so much stuff that gets made per update of the universe. And then if there's a lot of stuff being made in a particular region that happens to look the same locally spatially, that's an after effect of the fact that the whole causal graph is updating. Like it's, it's, it's, uh, Yeah, I don't, I don't know that. I think that that doesn't work. I don't think it works either, but I don't have a good argument in my mind about, But I do like the idea of the capacity that universe, because you've got the number of states. Yeah, we can come back to it. Well, let me ask real quick, like why does a different like local pockets of the universe start remembering stuff? How does memory emerge exactly? So at the origin of the universe, it was very forgetful. That's when the physicists were happiest. There's low, low memory objects, which is like ultra low memory objects, which is what the definition of stuff. Okay. So how does memory emerge? How does, which is the, how does this the temporal stickiness of objects emerge? Um, I, I, I'm going to take a very chemistcentric point of view because I can't imagine any other way of doing it. You, you could think of other ways maybe. But I would say heterogeneity in matter is where the memory, so you must have enough different ways of rearranging matter. For there to be a memory. So what that means is you've got particles colliding in a box. Let's just take a, um, some in all some elements in a box. Those elements can combine in a combinatorial set of ways. So there's a combinatorial explosion of the number of molecules or minerals or solid objects, bonds being made. Because there's such a large number, the population of different objects that are possible. This goes back to assembly theory where assembly theory, there's four types of universes, right? So you've got basically a, um, and this is what one was up earlier, where one universe where you've just got everything is possible. So you can take all the atoms and combine them and make everything. Then you've got basically what is the assembly combinatorial, where you basically have to accrue information in steps. Then you've got, um, assembly observed, right? And then you've got the object assembly going back. So what that means, what I'm trying to say is like, if you can take atoms and make bonds, let's say you take a nitrogen atom and add it to a carbon atom, you find an amino acid, then you add another carbon atom on in a particular configuration, then another one, all different molecules, they all represent different histories. So I would say for me right now, the most simple route into life seems to be through recording memories and chemistry. But that doesn't mean there can't be other ways, and can't be other emergent effects. But I think if you can make bonds and lots of different bonds, and they, those molecules can have a causal effect on the future. So imagine a box of atoms, and then you combine those atoms in some way. So you make molecule A from a load of atoms, and then molecule A can go back to the box and influence the box. Then you make A prime or AB or ABC, and that process keeps going, and that's where the memories come from, is that heterogeneity in the universe from bonding. I don't know if that makes any sense. And it's beginning to flourish at the chemistry level. Yeah. So the physicists have no, like, not enough. Yeah. They're like desperately begging for more freedom and heterogeneous components to play with. Yeah. That's exactly it. What do you think about that, Sarah? I mentioned already, I think it's significant, that whatever physics governs life emerges actually in chemistry. It's not relevant at the subatomic scale, or even at the atomic scale. It's in, well, atomic scale, because chemistry. But when you get into this combinatorial diversity that you get from combining things on the periodic table, that's when selection actually matters, or the fact that some things can exist and others can't exist actually starts to matter. So I think of it like you don't study gravity inside the atomic nucleus. You study it in terms of large-scale structure of the universe or black holes or things like that. And whatever we're talking about as physics of information or physics of assembly becomes relevant at a certain scale of reality. And the transition that you're talking about, I would think of as just when you get a sufficient density in terms of the assembly space of the relationship of the overlap and the assembly space, which is a feature of common memory, there is this transition to assembly-dominated physics, whatever that is. Oh, like when we're talking about. And we're trying to map out exactly what that transition looks like. We're pretty sure of some of its features, but we haven't done all of that. Do you think if you were there in the early universe, you would have been able to predict the emergence of chemistry and biology? And I ask that because at this stage as humans, do you think we can possibly predict the length of memory that might be able to be formed later on in this pocket of the universe? Like how complex is, what is the ceiling of assembly? I think as much time as you have in the past is how much you can predict in the future because that is actually physical in the system. And you have to have enough time for features of that structure to exist. Wait, let me push back. Isn't there somewhere in the universe that's like a shortest path that stretches all the way to the beginning? Yeah. That's building some giant monster? Maybe, yeah. Yeah, so you can't predict the monster. The universe has as much memory as the largest assembly object in the universe. Yeah. Right. But so you can't predict? You can't predict any deeper than that, no. Right, so like that I guess is all I'm saying is like what intuition do you have about complexity living in the world that you'd have today? Right, because you just you can I mean I guess how long does it get more fun? Like isn't there going to be at some point because there's a there's a heat death in the universe. Isn't there going to be a point of the most of the highest assembly of object at the highest probability being generated? When is the universe going to be the most fun and can we freeze ourselves and then live then? Exactly. Will you know when you're having the most fun that this is the best time you're in your prime? Are you going to do what everyone does which is deny that you're in your prime and the best years are still ahead of you? What option do you have? I mean the problem is there's a lots of really interesting features here. I just want to mention one thing that might be is I do think assembly theory applies all the way back to subatomic particles and I also think that cosmological selection might have been actually, there might have been it's not I would say it's a really boring bit but it's really important for a cosmologist that the universes have gone through. Was it Lee Smolin who proposed this? Maybe that there is this the basically universe evolves you've got the wrong constants. We'll start again and the most productive constants where you can allow particles to form in a certain way get propagate to the next universe and we go again. So actually selection goes all the way back and these these cyclin of universes and now this universe has been selected because life can occur and it carries on but I've really butchered that there is a much more. So there's some aspect where through the selection process there's parameters that are being fine tuned and we happen to be living in one where there's some level of fine tuning. Is there given that can you steel man the case that we humans are alone in the universe? We are the highest assembly index object in the universe. Yeah I can I guess sad though I mean so from. Is it possible? Yes it's possible. Let's assume well we we know I mean it's possible. So let me so okay so there is a particular set of elements on earth in a particular ratio and the right gravitational constant and the right viscosity you know of stuff being out of move around the right position right distance from our sun right number of events we have a moon the earth is rotating the late heavy bombardment produced a lot of brought in the right stuff and and Mars was cooking up you know the right molecules first so it was habitable before earth was actually doing the combinatorial search and before Mars kind of became on habitable it it seeded earth with the right molecular replicators and there was just the right stuff on earth and that's how the miracle of life occurred. Although I find I'm very uncomfortable with that because actually because life came so quickly in the earth's past but that doesn't mean that life is easy elsewhere it just might mean that that this the because chemistry is actually not a long-term thing chemistry can happen quickly so maybe going on with the steel manning of the argument to say actually the fact that life emerged quickly doesn't mean that life is easy it just means that the chemistry was right on earth and earth is very special and that's why there's no life anywhere else in the universe. Yeah so Sarah mentioned this kind of cascading thing so what if that's the reason we're lucky is that we got to have a rare cascading of like an accelerating cascading effect in terms of the complexity of things so like maybe most of the universe is trying to get sticky with the memory and it's not able to really form it and then we got really lucky in that and it has nothing it like there's a lot of earth like conditions let's say but it's just you really really have to get lucky on this. But I'm doing experiments right now in fact experiments that Sarah and I are working on because we have some joint funding for this where we're seeing that the universe can get sticky really quickly now of course we're being very anthropocentric we're using laboratory tools we're using theory but actually the phenomena of selection the process of developing heterogeneity we can do in the lab we're just seeing the very first hints of it and wouldn't it be great if we can start to pin down a bit more precisely becoming good Bayesianists for this for the origin of life and the emergence of life to finding out what kind of chemistries we really need to look for and I'm becoming increasingly confident we'll be able to do that in the next few years. Make life in the lab or make some selection in the lab from inorganic stuff from sand from rocks from dead stuff from moon wouldn't it be great to get stuff from the moon put it in our origin of life experiment and make moon life and restrict ourselves to interesting self-replicating stuff that we find on the moon. Sarah what do you think about this approach of engineering life in order to understand life so building life in the machine? Yeah so I mean Lee Lee and I are trying right now to build the vision for a large institute or experimental program basically to do this problem but I think of it as like we need to simulate a planet so like the large Hejang collider was supposed to be simulating conditions just after the big bang Lee's built a lot of technology in his lab to do these kind of selection engines but the question you're asking is how many experiments do you need to run what volume of chemical space do you need to explore before you actually see an event and I like to make an analogy to one of my favorite particle physics experiments which is super kamiakande that's looking for the decay of the proton so this is something that we predicted theoretically but we've never observed in our universe and basically what they're doing is every time they don't see a proton decay event they have a longer bound on the lifetime of proton so imagine we built an experiment with the idea in mind of trying to simulate planetary conditions physically simulate you can't simulate origin life in the computer you have to do it in an experiment simulate enough planetary conditions to explore the space of what's possible and bound the probability for an origin life event even if you're not observing it you can talk about the probability but we hopefully life is not exponentially rare and we would then be able to evolve in an automated system alien life in the lab and if we can do that then we understand the physics as well as we understand what we can do in particle accelerators so keep expanding physically the simulation the physical simulation until something happens yeah or just build a big enough volume of chemical experiments and evolve them say volume you mean like literally volume I mean physical volume in terms of space but I actually mean volume in terms of the combinatorial space of chemistry so how do you nicely control the combinatorial exploration the search space no such that it's always like you keep grabbing the low-hanging fruit yeah how do you build a search engine for chemistry I think very well we should carry on do this I should pretend the physics be the physicist you be the chemist no so the way to do it is um I will always play a joke because I like writing grants to ask for you know money to do cool stuff but the and I years ago I started wanting to build so I actually wanted the weather so I built this robot in my lab called a computer which is this robot you can program to do chemistry now it's a pro I made a programming language for the computer and made it operate chemists chemical equipment originally I wrote grants to say hey I want to make an origin of life system and no one would give me any money for this isn't what this ridiculous why are you wanting to make it's really hard it takes forever you're not a very good origin of life chemist anyway why would we give you any money and so I turned it around and said can you can instead can you give me money to make robots to make molecules are interesting and everyone went yeah okay you can do that and that's good so actually the funny thing is the computer project which I have in my lab which is very briefly it's just basically it's like literally an automated test tube and we've made a programming language for the test tube which is cool has come as literally came from this I went to my lab one day so I want to make a search engine to get the origin of life because I have a planet and I thought about doing in a microfluidic format so microfluidic is very nano very small channels in device where you can basically have all the pipes lit dump produced by lithography and you can have a chamber maybe say between say 10 and 100 microns in volume and we slot them all together like Lego and we can make an origin of life system and I could never get it to work and I realized I had to make do chemistry at the kind of test tube level and what you want to be able to do yeah yeah it goes back to night that tweet 1981 1981 the computer we're looking at a tweet fully in 1981 the computer was a distant dream in oh wow this is the scientist looking back it is the young boy who dreamed in 2018 it was realized spelled in the British way realized yeah so now there's a system that does the physical manifestation or whatever the programming language the spec tells you to do yeah well in 1981 I got my first computer is that x81 what was the computer zx81 zx81 Sinclair zx81 it was and I got a chemistry set and I like I like the chemistry set and I like the computer and I just wanted to put them together I thought wouldn't be cool if I could use the computer to control the chemistry set and and obviously that was insane and I was like you know eight years old right nine years out getting on nine years old and and then I I I invented the computer just because I wanted to build this origin of life grid right which is like literally a billion test tubes connected together in real time and real space basically throwing a chemical die dice throw dice throw dice throw dice you're gonna get lucky and that's what we I think Sarah and I have been thinking very deeply about because um you know there's more money being spent on the the the origin of the gravity or looking at the Higgs boson than the origin of life right and the origin of life is the I think the biggest question or not the biggest question it is a big question let's put it that way what is the biggest question you're okay saying that okay all right it's an impossible once you figure out the origin of life that that's not going to solve that's not actually gonna solve the question of what is life like is isn't because you're putting a lot of yeah I think that's the same problem but you're putting is it possible that you're putting too many too much bets into this origin part maybe the origin thing isn't isn't there always a turtle underneath the turtle isn't a stack of turtles because then if you create in the lab maybe you need some other stuff well let's not think about the already like you you like in the lab there's still memory yeah yes right the experiment is already the product of evolution right in some maybe really deep way not an obvious way in some very deep way yeah so maybe the haters are always going to be like well you have to reconstruct the fold you have to build it fortunately for us the haters are not aware of that argument well no I know I know I just I just think that if we create life in the lab it's not obvious that you'll get to the deep deep understanding of necessarily what is the line between life and non-life no I think so there's so much here I'm just like playing devil so much here but let me play devil's advocate back in a previous conversation right and say um yeah I will why not when I got time school cellular automata yes cellular automata these these very very simple things where you color squares black or white and implement rules and play them in time and you can get these very very complex patterns coming out you know there's nice rules they're cheering complete rules and and I would argue that so automata are that are don't really exist on their own they have to exist on a in a computing device if that whether it's computing devices a piece of paper an abstraction a mathematician drawing a grid or a a a framework now so I would argue so it's the a's are beautiful things simple going complex but the complexity is all borrowed from the lithography the not numbers right now let's take that same argument with the the chemistry experiment origin of life cat what you need to be able to do is go and I'm inspired to do this to go out and look for CA's occur in nature you know let's kind of let's find them some some CA's that just emerge in our universe and for people just start to interrupt for people just listening and in general I think what we're looking at is a cellular automata where again as Lee described there is just binary black or white square squares and they only have local information and they they're born and they die and you would think nothing interesting would emerge but actually we're looking at is something that I believe is called glider guns or or a glider gun which is moving objects in this multi-cell space that look like they're organisms that have much more information that have much more complexity than the individual building components in fact look like they have a long-term memory while the individual components don't seem like they have any memory at all yes the argument here is that has to exist on all this layer of infrastructure right and though it looks simple and then what I would make the argument I would make if I were you say why I think CA's are really simple and everywhere is safe show me how they emerge in substrate now let's go to the origin of life where machine I don't think we want to do the origin of life just any origin is good so we do so we literally have our sand shaker shake the sand like massive grid of chemistry experiments shaking sand shaking whatever and then because we know what we've put in so we know where how we've cheated and the same way with CA we know how we've cheated we know what the micro we know the number of operations needed we know how big a grid we want to get this if we could then say okay how can we generate this recipe in the lab and make a life form what were the what contingency did we need to put in and we're upfront about how we cheated okay say oh you had to shake it it was a periodic planet rotates it's tried comes in and out so and then we can start to basically say okay how difficult is it for these features to be found and then we can look for excellent planets and other features so I think Sarah is absolutely right we want to explain to people we're cheating in fact we have to cheat no one has given I'm good at writing grants I used to be I'm not very good right now keep getting rejected but I writing a grant for a planet and a hundred million years no grant fund there is gonna give me that but maybe money to make a kind of a grid a computer grid origin of life can be in physical space and physical space and just do it so Sarah said something which is you can't simulate the origin of life in a computer so like in simulation why not what are your you said it very confidently so yeah is it possible and why would it be very difficult like what's your intuition there I think it's very difficult right now because we don't know the physics but if you go based on principles of assembly theory and you think every molecule is actually a very large causal graph not just the molecule then you have to simulate all the features of those causal graphs and I think it becomes computationally intractable you might as well just build the experiment because you have in the physical space you have all the objects with all the memories yes you in the computer you would have to yes copy them and reconstruct yes yeah that's a beautifully put and I would say that lots of people you you just don't have enough resources it's it's easier to actually do the physical experiment because the we are literally I review the physical experiment almost like a computational experiment we're just out so it's just basically we're just outsourcing all the matrix and I'm on your point about the experiment being also an example of life it's almost like you want to design it's like you know all of us are lineages of propagating information across time and so everything we do becomes part of life because it's part of that causal chain so it's like you want to try to pinch off as much as you can of the information from your causal chain that goes into the experiment but you can't pinch off all of it to move it to like a different timeline it's always going to be part of your timeline but at least if you can control how much information you put in you can try to see how much does that particular trajectory you set up start generating its own assembly so you you know where it starts and then you want to try to see it take off on its own when you try to pinch it off as much as possible got it quick pause bath and break yes all right cool and now we're back all right we talked about the early days of the universe when there was just stuff and no memory not even causality I think Lee at least implied the causality is emergent somehow we could discuss this what happened before this all originated what's outside the universe divided by zero okay so it's not it's not relevant not understandable is it useful to even ask the question no just because it's so hard no it's not hard just not question if I can't do an experiment or even think of experiment the question doesn't exist well no you can't think of a lot of experiments no offense what I mean is my cause your causality graph is like this is what we've been talking about it's like what there is limits to your ability to construct experiments I agree but I'm I was trying to be facetious and I'm trying to make a point as I think that if you if there is a causal bottleneck through which information can't propagate in principle then it's very hard to ask to think of an experiment even in principle even one that's beyond my my mediocre intellects right which is fine I'm happy to accept that but this is one of the things I actually do think there was something before the Big Bang because I'm I would say that I think the Big Bang just couldn't occur and create time time created the Big Bang but there was time before the Big Bang yeah there's no space for this time yeah yeah but I mean I'm just making that stuff up just to make all the physicists happy but I think it's it that would using that would make them happy because they would be quite upset actually why would they be upset because they would say that time can't exist before the Big Bang yeah I mean this goes back to an argument that you might not want to do have the argument here I I was talking to Sarah earlier today about argument we had about time a long time ago I'm going to talk time and time and what I would it's like I think there is this thing called time or state creation the universe is creating states and it's outside of space but they create space so what I mean is you can imagine their states being created all the time and there is this thing called time time is a clock which you can use to measure when things happen but that doesn't mean because you can't measure something that states aren't being created and so you might locally refer to you the Big Bang and the Big Bang occurs at some point in when those states were there probably there had to be enough states for the Big Bang to occur and then but I I think that there is something wrong with our kept conception of how the universe was created in the Big Bang because we don't really get time because again you know I don't want to become boring and sound like a broken record but but time is a real thing and until I can really explain that more elegantly I'm just gonna get into more trouble though we're gonna talk about time because time is useful measuring device for experiments but also time is an idea all that okay but let me first ask Sarah is like what do you think is it a useful question to ask what happened before the Big Bang is a useful question to ask what's outside the universe so I would think about it as the Big Bang is an event that we reconstructed as probably happening in the past of our universe based on current observational data and so the way I like to think about it is we exist locally in something called the universe so and and going back to like the physics of existence we exist locally in the space of all things that could exist and we can infer certain properties of the structure of where we exist locally and one of the properties that we've inferred in the past is that there is a thing we call the Big Bang there's some signatures of our local environment that indicate that there was a very low information event that started our universe I think that's actually just an artifact of the structure of the assembly space that when you when you start losing all the memory and the objects it it looks like what we call a Big Bang so I think it makes sense to talk about where you are locally I think it makes sense to talk about counterfactual possibilities what could exist outside the universe in the sense that they become part of our reasoning and therefore part of our causal chain of things that we can do so like the multiverse in my mind exists but it doesn't exist as a multiverse of possible universes it exists as an idea in our minds that allows us to reason about how physics works and then to do physics differently because we reason about it that way so I always like to recenter it on things exist but they don't always exist like we think they exist so when we're thinking about things outside the universe they absolutely exist because we're thinking about them but they don't look like they don't look like the projections in our minds there's something else it's something you said just gave an idea to go back to your question if there was core I mean some if something caused the Big Bang if there was some memory or some artifact of that then of course it's to answer your question is worth going back to that because that would imply there is something beyond that barrier that filter yeah and that's what you were saying I guess right I'm agnostic to what exists outside the universe I just don't think that like I think the most interesting things for us to be doing are finding explanations that allow us to do more like like that optimism so I tend to draw the boundary on questions I ask is being scientific ones because I find that that's where the most creative potential is to impact the future trajectory of what we're doing on this planet it's interesting thing about the Big Bang is basically from our current perspective of what we're able to detect it's the time when things were forgotten yes it's the time the reset from our limited perspective and so the question is is it useful to ever study the thing that was forgotten or should we focus just on them on the memories they're still there well the point I was trying to make about the experiment is I was trying to say both things and I think perhaps yes from the portfolio point of view if you could then imagine what was forgotten and then work forwards you will have different consequences so then it becomes testable so I'm as long as we can find tests and it's definitely worth thinking about what I don't like is when physicists say what happened before the Big Bang and before before before without giving me any credible conjecture about what we would what how would we know the difference but the way you framed it is quite nice I like that it's like a what what have we forgotten is there a room for God in assembly theory who's God I like arguments for a necessary being better than God well I think what's in like something that has to exist oh so you like I mean you like the shortest path like this God need no no I mean I like you can go back to like Thomas Aquinas and arguments for the existence of God but I think I think most of the interesting theological arguments are always about whether something has to exist or there was a first thing that had exist but I think there's a lot of logical loopholes in those kind of words well so God here meaning the machine that creates that generates the stuff but good God so what I was just the universe yeah well yeah well but I there's a difference between I said I imagine like a black box like a machine yeah that's then I would be more comfortable calling that God because it's a machine you go into a room and there's a thing with a button yeah I don't like the great programmer in the sky version yeah but if it's more kind of like I don't like to think of if you look at a cellular Tomita if it if it's the cells and the rules that doesn't feel like God that generates a bunch of stuff but if there's a machine like that does that runs the cellular Tomita and set the rules then that feels like God that sort of in terms of terminology so I wonder if there's like a machine that's required to generate this universe that's very sort of important for running this in the lab so as I said earlier I think I said this earlier that I can't remember the phrase but something like I mean does God exist in our universe yes where does God exist exhaust God at least exists in the abstraction in my and our minds particularly of people who have who have religious faith they believe in but let's then take your but you're talking a little bit more about generic say well is there a mechanism beyond the universe you're calling God I would say God did not exist at the beginning but he or she does now because I'm saying the man well you don't know that he didn't exist in the beginning so like this could be us in our minds trying to recall like just what listen to gravitational waves detecting gravitational waves it's the same thing it's us trying to go back further and further into our memories to try to understand the machines that make up to make up us and so it's possible that we're trying to grasp at possible kind of what kind of machines could create there's always a tweet there's always a tweet the universe is a computer then God must have built it computers need creators there you go and then Yoshibaki replied since there's something rather than nothing perhaps existence is the default hmm if existence is the default that many computers exist creator gods are necessary computers and necessarily computers too I'm very confused by that but that's an interesting idea that existence is a default versus non existence I agree with that but then leave response perhaps this reasoning is incomplete that's that's how scientists talk trash each other on Twitter apparently which part don't you agree with when he said if existence is default then many computers exist this comes back to the inventor and discovery argument I would say the universe at the beginning wasn't capable of computation because there wasn't enough technology enough states so what you're saying is the mecha if God is a mechanism so I might actually agree but then the thing is lots of people seem more exceed God is more than the mechanism for me God could be the causal graph in assembly theory that creates all the stuff that the memories we know and the fact that we can even relate to each other is because we have the same we share that heritage and what why we love each other or we like to see God in each other is it's just we can we know we have a shared existence so that if the God is the mechanism that created this whole thing I think a lot of people see God you know in a religious sense as if as that mechanism also being able to communicate with the objects it creates and if it's just the mechanism we won't be able to create with object communicate with objects it creates it can only create you can't like interact with the versions of God that create the universe and then left you know yeah like spark percent for some religions but the first spark yeah but I think I liked your analogy of the machine and the rules right but I think part of the problem is you I mean we have this conception that we can disentangle the rules from the physical substrate right and that's the whole thing about like software and hardware being separate or the way Newton wrote his laws that there was some you know like they exist outside the universe they're not actually a feature of the universe they don't have to merge out of the universe itself so I think if you if you merge your two views then it gets back to the God is the universe and then I think that the deeper question is why does it seem like there's meaning and purpose and if I think about the features of the universe that give it the most meaning and purpose those are the what we would call the living components of the universe so if you wanted to say God is a physically real thing which you were saying is like an emergent property of our minds but I would just say you know the way the universe creates meaning and purpose there is really a physics there it's not like a illusory thing and that is just what what the physics of life is is it possible that we've forgotten much of the mechanisms that created the universe so like so basically you know whatever if God is that mechanism we just leave parts of that behind well but the universe is constantly generating itself so if God is that mechanism it would be that that would still be active today I don't believe I like I'm agnostic but if I if I if I recall would call the things I believe in God in the way that some people talk about God I would say that God is you know like in the like universe now it's not an absent thing are you I'm so I think there's a mislabeling here because you're I mean from I mean I'm professional idiot I'm actually but but she put that in your CV yeah professionally but so recreationally or amateur but professionally I think for it I would say if you were talking about God I mean again I'm way out way out my depth and I'm almost feeling come you know I feel quite uncomfortable articulating but I'll try for me a lot of people that think of God as a consciousness of reasoning entity that actually has causal power and you're human like intelligent and you're and so you're like then you're saying like gravity could be God or time could be God I mean I think for me for my conception of time is probably as fundamental as God because it gave rise to human intelligence and consciousness in which we can have this abstract notion of God so I I think that you're maybe talking about God in a very mechanistic kind of unsophisticated sense whereas other people say that God is more sophisticated and got all this you know feelings and love and you know and this abstracting ability so is that what or do you mean that do you mean God as in this conscious entity that decided to flick the universe into existence well one of the features that God would have is the ability to flick the universe into existence I you know like Windows 95 I don't know if God is Windows 95 or Windows XP or Windows 10 I don't know the full feature set okay so you at the very least you have to flick the universe into existence and then other features might include ability to interact with that universe in interesting ways and then how do you interact with the universe in interesting ways you have to be able to speak the language of its different components so in order to interact with humans you have to know how to act human-like so so I don't I don't know but it seems like whatever mechanism created the universe might want to also generate local pockets of mechanisms that can interact with that like make a joke inject yeah it was long I mean it could be just a teenager in another just playing a video maybe well I was gonna say I mean I I don't so this is referring to our origin of life engine it's like I don't believe in God but it doesn't mean I don't want to be one right well I want to make a universe and make a life form but that maybe that may be rude to people who have you know dear religious beliefs what I mean by that is isn't if we are able to create an entirely new life form different chemistry different culture what does it make up and makes us good by that definition it makes us gods right well there is I mean like when you have children you're like one of the magical things of that is your kind of mini gods I mean first of all from a child's perspective parents are gods for quite a while I mean they're there in the positive sense there's a magic that's why I love robotics is you instill life into something and that makes you feel God like in a sort of positive way creator yeah exactly and a small scale and then God is would be a creator at the largest possible scale I suppose okay you mentioned offline the assembled Tron assembly Tron assembly Tron yeah what's an assembly Tron these are the this an early idea of something you're thinking about um so Sarah's team well I think Sarah's team are interested in them under using AI to understand life my team is and I'm and I'm think wondering if we could apply the principles of assembly theory that is the causal structure that you get with assembly theory and hybridize it and make a new type of neuron if you like I mean there are causal neural networks out there but they are they are not quite the architecture lot what I would like I would like to associate memory bits with basically I'd like to make a rather than having an ASIC for neural networks I want to make an ASIC for assembly networks right and so can you say that again assembly networks so what what is a like a thing with an input and output and it's like a neural network type of thing what does it do exactly simple what's the output so in this case so if you're talking about a general neural network I mean in general neural network you can train it on all sort any sort of data right depending on the the the framework with its like text or or image data or whatnot and that's fine but there's no causal structure associated with that data now just imagine rather than you know make this they wouldn't classify difference between cat and good dog right classic cat and dog neural network what about if the system understood the assembly space it created the cat and the dog and rather than guessing what was happening and training on those images not understanding those features it you almost like you could imagine doing a going back a step and doing and training going back a step and doing the training going back a step back a step back a step and and I wonder if that is actually the origin of intelligence or how we'll crack intelligence because we need to because we'll we'll create the entire graph of events and and be able to kind of look at cause and effect across those graphs I'm explaining it really badly but it's it's a gene of an idea and I'm guessing very smart very rich people in AI already doing this trying to not generate cats and dogs but trying to generate things of high assembly index yeah and I think I think and and also using causal graphs in neural networks and machine learning and deep learning maybe building a new architecture I'm just wondering is there something we can get out assembly theory allows us to rebuild current machine learning architectures to give more give causation more cheaply I mean I don't know if that's what you we've been inventing this for a little while but we're trying to finish the theory paper first before we do anything else yeah you're also want to have say goal-directed behavior in neural networks then assembly theory is a good framework for doing that Daniel's been thinking about that a lot yeah and I think it's a really interesting idea that you can map concepts from how neural networks learn to thinking about goal-directed behavior as a learning process that you're learning a specific goal the universe is learning a goal when it generates a particular structure and that you could map that physical structure in a neural network how what's the goal well in a neural network you're designing the goal in in biology I mean you know people are not supposed to use teleological language in biology which is ridiculous but because goals are real things they're just post-selected so you can talk about goals after the fact you know once a goal emerges in the universe that physical entity has a goal but but Lee and I came up with a test for like a Turing test for goal-directed behavior based on the idea and assembly when like we have to formalize this still but I would like to write a paper on it but like the basic idea is like if you like if you had two systems that were completely equivalent you know like in the instantaneous like physical experimental setup so we have to figure out how to do this but there was something that would be different in their future and there was a symmetry breaking you observe in the present based on that possibility that future outcome then you could say that that system had some representation of some kind of goal in mind about what it wanted to do in the future and I so so goals are interesting because they don't exist as instantaneous things they exist across time which is one of the reasons that assembly theories may be more naturally able to account for the existence of goals so goals are the only exist in time or they manifest themselves in time through you said symmetry breaking so it's it's almost like imagine like if representations in your mind are real right and you can imagine future possibilities but imagine everything else is physically equivalent and the only thing that you actually change your decision based on is what you model as being the future outcome then somehow that representation in your mind of the future outcome becomes causal to what you're doing now so it's kind of like retricle effect but it's not actually retricle it's just that your your assembly space is actually includes those possibilities as part of the structure it's just you're not observing all the features the assembly space in the current moment what the possibilities exist but they don't become a goal until they realize so so one of the features of assembly space is super interesting and it's easier to envision with like legos for example is if you're thinking about an assembly space you can't observe the entire assembly space in any instant in time so if you imagine a stack of legos and you want to look at the assembly space of a stack of legos you have to break the legos apart and then you look and then you look at all the possible ways of building up the original object so now you have in your mind the goal of building that object and you have all the possible ways of doing it and those are actual physical features of that object but that object doesn't always exist what exists is the possibility of generating it right and the possibilities are always infinite well for that particular object you know like you know it has a well-defined assembly space and I guess what I'm saying is that object is the assembly space but you actually have to unpack that object across time to view that feature of it it's only an observable across time the term goal is such a important and difficult to explain concept right because what you want is a way is like I think only conscious beings can have conscious goals everything else is doing selection and but selection does invent goals and in a way that the way that biology reinterprets the past in the present is kind of how that issue to understand there was a goal in the past now right it's kind of like goals only exist back in time so first of all only conscious beings can have conscious goals I'm not even gonna touch that one well hey well hey go for it come on well the line between conscious goals and non-conscious goals exactly right and also maybe just on top of that you said a touring test for goal-directed behavior what's the touring test potentially look like so if you got two objects we were thinking about this so we actually got some funding to work to go on two teams so I'm trying to do in part of this is I'm trying to do a bit of theory and Sarah's teaching me a bit of theory and Sarah's trying to design experiments and I'm teaching experiments because I think it's really good for us to have that to say then would a so that's good I like this this I'm sure you see Dan Dennett essay they wrote on yeah and I can't explain why we wouldn't want to call it a touring test after but yeah yeah so Dan Dennett wrote this really nice essay about herding cats and freewill inflation the title's so brilliant it's the actual title I think so herding cats and freewill inflation yeah something like that I mean it's not maybe not and so no I think that's right so if you've got a let's imagine you got two objects on a hillside okay and this happens to be a snowy hill and let's just say you see an object get rolling down the hill or you and the rock rolls downhill but the start goes to the end how do you know objects had a goal now you unveil the object and you'll see it's actually a skier and the skier starts at the top and goes down the bottom great then you look at the rock rock rolls down the hill gets the bottom how can you tell the difference between the two so and what Dan says is like well this is clear the skiers in control and the because they're adjusting trajectory so some updating going on then the only way you could really do that is you have to put the skier back to the top of the hill again there tend to start roughly in the same space and probably go to take all that complex set of trajectories and end up pretty much at the same finish point right with plus or minus few meters whereas if it's just a random rock going down to a random trajectory that wouldn't happen and so what Sarah and I were kind of doing when we were writing this grant we're like we need to somehow instantiate the skier and the rock in an experiment and then say okay when is the object when it so for an object to have a goal it has to have an update has to have some sensing and some kind of you know inbuilt actuation to respond to the environment and and then we just have to iterate on that and maybe Sarah you can then fill in the cheering test part well yeah I guess the motivation for me was slightly different so I get really frustrated about conversations about consciousness as most people do you know a lot of people are which is not necessarily related to to free will directly or to this goal directed behavior but I think there's a whole set of bundled and related topics here but I think for me I was you know everybody's always interested in explaining intrinsic experience and quantifying intrinsic experience and there's all sorts of problems with that because you can never actually be another physical system so you can't know what it's like to be another physical system so I always thought there must be some way of getting at this problem about if an agent or an entity is conscious or at least has internal representations and those are real physical things that they're it must have causal consequences so the way I would ask the question of consciousness is not you know what it is it like intrinsically but if if things have intrinsic experience is there any observable difference from the outside about the kind of causation that that physical system would enact in and for me the most interesting thing that humans do is have imagination so like we can imagine rockets centuries before we build them they've become real physical things because we imagine them and people might disentangle that from conscious experience but I think a lot of the sort of imagination we do is actually a conscious process so then this becomes a question of if I were observing systems and I said one had an internal representation which is slightly different than a conscious experience obviously so I'm entangling some concepts but it's a loose set of thought experiments then hot and I and I set them up in a physically equivalent situation would it be the case that there would be experimental observables associated with it and that that became the idea of trying to actually measure for internal representation conscious of Turing basically didn't want to do that you just wanted the machine that could emulate and trick you into having the behavior but never dealt with the internal experience because he didn't know how to do that and I guess I was wondering is there a way to set up the experiment where you could actually test for that for imagination that led to the that there was something internal going on some kind of inner world as people say but I or you could say you know like it actually is an agent it's making decisions it has an internal representation and whether you say that's experience or not is a different thing but at least the the feature that there's some abstraction it's doing that's not obvious from looking at the physical substrates do you think it's possible to do that kind of thing one of the compelling things about the towing test is that you know defining intelligent defining any complicated concept as as a thing like observing it from the surface and not caring about what's going on deep inside because how do you know that's the point so the idea is exactly that so what we try to do the Turing test for goal directiveness is literally takes some objects that clearly don't have any internal representation grains of sand blowing on the beach or something right and I know a crab wandering around on the beach and then generating experiment where we literally the experiment generates an entity that literally has no internal representation to sand be like a drop these are oil droplets actually what got in mind a robot that makes all droplets but then what we want to try and do is train the oil droplets to be like crabs give them an internal representation give them the ability to integrate information from the environment so they understand they remember the past are in the present and can imagine a future and a very limited way they're kind of game engine their limited simulation of the world allows them to then make a decision your objects across time so then you would run a bunch of crabs like over and over and over and over how many crabs Lee how many is that what's because you have to have a large number of crabs what is what is your theory say is there mathematical we're working on it I mean this is limit crab limit there's literally a there's literally what's the herding cats have to do that's random wait what's cats in the title by Daniel Dennett hurting cats and the free will inflation so what is hurting cats mean what is free will inflation mean so this I love this essay because it explained to me how I could live in the deterministic universe but have free will but have freedom you know and because and also it helped me explain that the time needed to be a real thing in this universe so what basically Dan was saying here is like how do you how do these cats appear to just do what they want right and if you live in a deterministic universe why do the cats do these things you know aren't they just isn't as all obvious and how does free will inflate the universe and for me I mean probably I love the essay because my interpretation of the essay in assembly theory makes complete sense because you need an expanding universe in assembly theory to create novelty that you search for that then when you find something interesting and you keep doing it because it's cool and it gives you an advantage then it appears in the past to be a goal so what does in assembly theory the expansion of the universe look like what are we talking about why is why why does the expansion universe give you more possibilities of novelty and cool stuff so for me I don't think about the universe in terms of big bang in space I think about in terms of the big the big memory expansion that you have one you only have the ability to store one bit of information so then you can't do very much so what the universe has been doing since the since forever it's been creating more it's been increasing the size of its RAM okay so it's like one megabyte two megabyte three megabyte four megabytes all the way up and so the more RAM you have the more you can remember about the past then which allows you to do cooler things in the future so if you can remember how to launch a rocket then you might be able to imagine how to land a rocket and then relaunch reland and carry on because and so the the you able you're able to expand the space and remember the past and so that's why I think it's very important but not a perfect memory it's it's a it's an interesting question whether there's some forgetting that happens it might increase is the expansion of the forgetting at some point accelerate faster than the remembering I think that that's a very important thing that probably intelligence does and we're gonna learn in machine learning about because you want machine learning right now or artificial intelligence right now doesn't have memory right but you want the ability to or not for if you want to get to human like consciousness you need to have the ability I suppose to remember stuff and then to selectively forget stuff so you can re-remember it and compress it arguably the way that we come up with new physical laws yeah yeah sorry you can I think that there is a great deal to be gained from having the ability to remember things but then when you forget them you can then have it you can basically do the simulation again and work out if you get to that compressed representation so there's in cycles so cycles of memory remembering and forgetting are probably important but there shouldn't be excuse to have a met universe of no memory in it the universe is gonna remember that it forgot but just not tell you I'm looking at the this paper and it's talking about a puppet controlling a puppet controlling a puppet controlling a puppet controlling a puppet controlling a puppet concept she's easy to understand but physically impossible as physically impossible is predicting a fair coin toss I don't know what he's talking about but there's pictures of puppets controlling puppets let me ask you there's a there's a few things I want to ask but we brought up time quite a bit you guys tweet about time quite a bit what is time in all this we kind of mentioned it a bunch is it not important at all in terms of is just a word should we be talking about causality mostly like so what do you think is that we've talked about like memories is that the fundamental thing that we should be thinking about and and time is just a useful measurement device or something like that well there's different kinds of time right so I think in assembly theory when we're talking about time we're talking about the ordering of things so that's the causal graph part and so then the fundamental structure the universe is that there is a certain ordering and certain things can't happen to other things happen but usually when we colloquially talk colloquially talk about time we're talking about the flow of time and I guess Lee and I were actually debating about this this morning so and talking on it walking on the river here which is a very lovely spot for talking about time but that the you know that when the universe is updating its transitioning between things that exist now and things that exist now that's really the flow of time so there's there's you have to separate out those concepts at bare minimum and then there's also an arrow of time that people talk about in physics which is that time doesn't appear to have a directionality and fundamental physics but it does to us right like we can't go backwards in time and usually we you know that would be explained in physics in terms of well there's a cosmological arrow of time but there's also the thermodynamic arrow of time of increasing entropy but what we would say in assembly theory is that there is a clear directionality the universe only runs in one direction which is why some things it's easy to make if the universe runs in one direction it's easy to make processes look reversible for example if they have no memory they're easy to run forward and backwards which is why the laws of physics that we have now look the way they do because they involve objects that have no memory but when you get to things like us it becomes very clear that the universe has a directionality associated to it so it's not reversible at all it's the no man ever steps in the same river I just have to bring that out because you want yeah no man ever steps in the same river twice for it's not the same river and he's not the same man so that it's not reversible no no but reversibility is an emergent property right so we think of the reversibility laws as being fundamental and the irreversibility is being emergent but I think what we would say from how we think about it and certainly it's easy to give the case for our perception of time but also you know what's happening in biological evolution you can make things reversible but it requires work to do it and it requires certain machines to run it forward and backward and Chiara Marletto is working some interesting ideas on constructor theory related to that which is totally different side of ideas and you can travel back in time sometimes yes you can't you can't travel actually back in time but you could reconstruct yeah you try to have existed in the past you're always moving forward in time but you can cycle through like I mean I clarify what you said quickly you travel forward in time to travel back yes that thank you that really clear what's there saying you don't go back in time you recreate what happened in the past in the future and inspect it again so in that local pocket of time it's as if you travel back in time so I don't how's that not traveling back in time because you're not going back to your same self back in time you are you're creating that in the future else is the same as it was in the past no no no no it's not in registry I mean it goes back to the big question I'm saying I mean this is something I was trying to look up today when I first we first had this discussion and I was talking to Sarah on Skype and said by the way time because it time is the fundamental thing in the universe she almost hung up on me right but but you can even I mean if you want to make an analogy to computation and I think Charles Bennett actually has a paper on this like about reversible computation and reversible Turing machines in order to make it reversible you have to store memory to run the process backwards so time is always running forward in that because you have to write the memory you can erase the memory but the point when you go back to zero right but the whole point is that in order to have a process that even runs in both directions you have to start talking about memory to store the information to run it backwards I got it so you can't really then you can't have it exactly how it was in the past you exactly you have extra stuff extra baggage always okay a really important thing I want to say on this I think if I try and get it right to say that if you can think that the universe is expanding in terms of the number of boxes that it has to store states right and this is where the direction out the universe comes from everything comes from you could erase what's in those boxes but the fact you've now got so many boxes at time now in this present is more of those boxes than they were in the past see but the boxes aren't physical boxes then it's not a space of time why is the number of boxes always expanding it's very hard to imagine this because we live in space so what I'm saying which is I think probably correct is that we just let's just imagine for a second there is a non-local situation but there are these things called states and the universe irrespective of whether you measure anything there is a universal let's call it a clock or a state creator maybe we can call it that's why maybe you can call it God but let's call it a state creator where the universe is expanding in the number of states it has why are you saying it's expanding though is that obvious that's expanding it's obvious because that's where the because um we we that's a source of novelty it's a source of novelty and it also explains why the universe is not predictable I know it's not predictable well it's I just like interrupting you know it's fun as you're struggling I'm struggling because it's but I'm trying to be as concrete as possible not sound like I'm insane yeah and I'm not insane it's it's obvious because you did um I'm a chemist so as a chemist I grew into the world understanding irreversibility irreversibility is all I knew and when people start telling me the universe is actually reversible it's a magic trick we can use time to do it so what I mean is that the the second law is really the magical but why does it need to be magical the universe is just asymmetric all I'm saying is the universe is asymmetric in the state production and we can erase those states but we just have more computational power so what I'm saying is that the universe is deterministic horizon this is one of the reasons we can't live in a simulation by the way the error very can't live in a simulation the irreversibility yeah so basically every time you try and simulate the universe in this you know I live in a simulation the universe is expanded in states like oh damn it I need to make my computer bigger again and every time you try and contain the universe in the computation because it's got bigger in number of states and so I'm saying the fact the universe has novelty in it is going to turn out experimentally to be proof that time as I've labeled it is fundamental and exists as a physical thing that creates space okay so if you can prove that novelty is always being created you're saying that's possible to also then prove that it's always expanding in the state space those are things that to be have to be proven that's what we're experiments for yeah and you're trying to like by looking at the sliver of reality show that there's always novelty being generally yeah because if we go and live in a universe that the conventional physicists would live in it's a big lookup table of stuff and everything exists I want to prove that that book is that book doesn't exist it's continuously being added pages on so what I'm saying if the universe is a book we started the universe at the beginning only had no pages and have what had one page another page another page whereas the physicists would now say all the pages exist and we could in principle access them I'm saying that is fundamentally incorrect do you know what's written in this book the free will question is there room for free will in this in this view of the universe is generating novelty and getting greater and greater assembly structures built Sarah yes okay done next question why what's the source of free will in this well so I think it depends on what you mean by free will um but yeah well please I think I think what I'm interested in as far as the phenomena free will is do we have individual autonomy and agency and you know when I do things is it really me or is it my atoms that did it and that's the part that's interesting to me I guess there's also the determinism versus randomness part but the way I think about it is like each of us are like a thread or at like an assembly space through you know this this giant possibility space and it's like we're moving on our own trajectory through that space and that is defined by our history so we're sort of causally contingent on our past but also because of the sort of intersection of novelty generation it's not completely predetermined by the past and so so then you have the causal control of the determinism part that you are your causal history and there's some determinism from that past but there's also room for creativity and I think it's actually necessary that something like free will exists if the universe is going to be as creative as possible because if I were all intelligent being inventing a universe and I wanted it to have maximum number of interesting things happen again we should come up with the metric of interesting but generating yes I know generating you know maximal possibilities then I would want the agents to have free will because it means that they're more individual like they like each entity actually is a different causal force in the universe and it's intrinsic and local property of that system there's a greater number of distributed agents like are you always creating more and more individuality kind of I would say you're creating more causal power but your causal power the word consciousness is the causal power somehow correlated with consciousness I mean now that's why I have this conception of consciousness being related to imagination because the more that we can imagine can happen on the more counterfactual possibilities you have in mind the more you can actually implement and somehow free will is also at the intersection of the counterfactual becoming the actual so can you elaborate on that a little bit that consciousness is imagination I don't know exactly how to articulate it and I'm sure people will take you know aim at certain things I'm saying but I think the language is really imprecise so I'm not the best way to it's really interesting like what is imagination and what is it what role does it play in the human experience in experience of any yeah I love imagination I think it's like the most amazing thing we do but I guess one way I would think about it is we talked about the transition to life being the universe acquiring memory and life does something really interesting you just think about biology generally it remembers states of the past to adapt to things that happen in the future so so the longer life has evolved on this planet the deeper that past is the more memory we have the more kinds of organisms and things but what human level intelligence has done is quite different it's not just that we remember states that the universe has existed in before it's that we can imagine ones that have never existed and we can actually make them come into existence and I think that's the most unique feature about the transition to whatever we are from what life on this planet has been doing for the last four billion years and I think I think it's deeply related to the phenomena we call consciousness yeah I was gonna I mean just agree with that I think that consciousness is the ability to generate those counterfactuals now whether you can say you know are there degrees of consciousness I mean and I mean I let I mean I'm I'm sorry panpsychists but electrons don't have counterfactuals although they do have some kind of they are able to search a space and pathways but but I think that there is a very concrete or concrete there's a very specific property that humans have and I'm and I don't know if it's unique to humans I mean maybe dogs can do it and and birds can do it right and where they are basically solving a problem because consciousness was invented or this abstraction was invented by evolution for that for a specific reason and so look the one of the reasons why I came to the conclusion that time was fundamental was actually because Sarah and I had completely different the most heated debate on Skype chat ever no no no we have to stop it no I know it goes back to the free will thing so I I think the although I've changed my view a bit because there's some really interesting physicists out there talks about how the measurement problem in in in Newtonian space I don't want to go there just now because I think I'll mess it up but briefly I could not see how the universe how we can have free will and I mean this is really boring because this is like this is a well trodden path but oh but I'm not so boring I suppose it's kind of we just want to be precise if the universe is deterministic how can we have free will right so Sarah's a physicist I think she believed but not believe can show that the most of the laws we have a deterministic to some degree quantum mechanics onto Newtonian stuff and yet there's Sarah telling me she believes in free will I'm like you but your belief system is broken here right because you you're demanding free will in a deterministic universe and and then I've realised that I I agreed with her that I do think that free will is a thing because we are able to search for novelty and then that's where I came to the conclusion that time universe is expanding in terms of novelty and it goes back to that Dan Dennett essay that we're talking about the free will inflation free will so you are you have so the past it did not exist in the past the past exists in the present what I mean is like you are the there was no past there is only present so I mean you are the sum total there everything that's occurs in the past is it is manifestly here in the present and then you have this little echo state in your consciousness because you're able to you're able to imagine something without actualization but the fact you imagine it that occurs and electrons and potassium ion flows in your neural network in your brain maybe consciousness is just the present so so somehow you imagine that and then by imagining oh that's good yeah I'm gonna make a robot to do this thing and program it and then you physically then go and do it so that changes the future sorry what's imagination does it require the past does it require the future does it require memory does it it's imagination does it only exist in the moment so imagination is probably it's an instantaneous readout of what's going on you can maybe your subconscious brain has been generating all the all the bits for it but no imagination occurs when you in your game engine you you remember the past and you integrate sensory the present and you try and work out what you want to do in the future and then you go and make that happen so there the imagination this is just like imagine asking what imagination is about asking what surfing is you can see you can surfboard surfer wave coming in when you're on that wave and you're surfing that's where the imagination is I think I think imagination is just accessing things that aren't the present moment in the present moment so like I can I'm sitting here and I'm looking at the table and I can imagine the river and things or whatever it was and so it seems to be that it's like it's our ability to access things that aren't present but so conjure up worlds some of them might be akin to something that happened to you recently they don't have to be things that actually happen in your past and I think this gets back to assembly theory like the way I would think about imagination from an assembly theoretic standpoint is I'm a giant causal graph and I exist in a present moment as a particular configuration of Sarah and but there's a lot of I carry a lot of evolutionary baggage I have that whole causal history and I can access parts of it now when you talk about getting to something as complex as us having as large assembly space as us there's ways of like there's a lot of things in that causal graph that have ever actually never existed in the past history of the universe because like the universe got big enough to contain the three of us in this room in time but not all the features of each one of us individually have come into existence as physical objects we would recognize as individual objects this goes back to your point that we actually have to explain why why things actually even look like objects and aren't just a schmear of mass and just on that the free will and physics thing when you were talking I was I just want to bring this up because I think it's a really interesting viewpoint that Nicholas Gizin has that you know like we want to use the laws of physics and then say you can't have free will and his point is you have to have free will in order to even choose to set up an experiment to test the laws of physics so in some sense free will should be more fundamental than physics is to because to even do science there's some assumption that the agents have free will and I always thought it was really perplexing that you know physics wants to remove agency because the idea that I could do an experiment here in this part of Earth and then I can move somewhere else and prepare an identically you know identically prepared experiment run experiment again seems to imply something about the structure of our universe that is not encoded in the laws that we're testing in those experiments so this kind of dream of physics that you can do multiple experiments different locations and validate each other you're saying that's that's an illusion no I'm saying that requires decision-making and free will to be a real thing I think like I think that I think the fact that we can do science is not arbitrary and I think people you know the standard Canon in physics would be well you could trace all of that back to the initial condition universe but the whole point of science is I can imagine doing the experiment and I can do it and then I can do it again and again and again do you imagination somehow fundamentally generative of novelty yes that's not like the universe could have predicted the things you imagined the imagination super so we're coming back to novelty I think novelty can exist outside of imagination but it's super charges it is another transition I think I mean I would say I mean this may be a boring statement but I would say that's right sorry I'm not sure it's hard these are hard questions yeah I mean I think the fact that objects exist is yet another proof that the time is fundamental and novelty exists right because I think again if you ask a physicist to write down in an infinite Bible of the universe let's call it the Bible the Mac you know a book yeah well that's a mathematical universe whether you're a max tegmark or Sean Carroll or Frank Wilczek or Stephen Wolfram okay yeah I love it too lots of pretty pictures it's really interesting that they they cope with the enormity of the universe by saying well it's all their mathematics it all exists right and and I would say that that's why I'm excited about the future of the universe because it it although it is somehow dependent upon the past it is not constrained just by the past which is kind of mad yeah that's what free will is it's not constrained by the past is dependent in the past this moment it's not just dependent this moment is the past and yet it has the capacity to generate a totally unpredictable future I mean the other thing I would say it's super important for human beings right human beings have actually very little causal control in the future I realize this the other week yeah yeah so what happened the way so this is what I think it is the way by reinterpreting your past I mean talk about from a kind of cognitive psychological cognitive point of view by reinterpreting your past in your current mind you can actually helps you shape your future again so you but you have much more freedom to interpret your past to act in the present to change your future than you do to change your future I may sound weird so I'm saying everybody imagine your past think about your past reinterpret your past in the nicest way you can then imagine what you can do next or imagine your past in a more negative way and what you do next and look at those two counterfactuals they're different yes fast I mean Daniel Kahneman talks about this that most of our life is lived in our memories and it's interesting because you can essentially in imagination choose the life you live so maybe free will exist in imagination choices are made in your imagination and that results in you basically able to control how the future on roles because you're like imagining like reinterpreting constantly the things that happen to you exactly see you there if you want to increase your amount of free will those people that have I don't think everyone has equal amounts of agency because of because of our sad sad constraints whether whether you know happenstance with health economic born in a certain place right but you're those of us that have the ability to go back and reinterpret our past and and and use that to change the future are the ones exert most agency in the present and I want to I want to achieve higher degrees of agency and enable everyone else to do that as well to have more fun in the universe then we'll hit that peak no there's no fun fun I don't think there's ever gonna be a maximum pop I think it's the wonderful thing about the future is is always gonna be more fun yeah you I think again go back to Twitter I think you lead tweeted something about being a life maximalist that you want to maximize the number of life the the amount of life in the universe is so and you know that's the more general version of that goal is to maximize the amount of fun in the universe because life is a subset of fun there all kinds of I suppose they're either correlated or exactly equal I don't know anyway speaking of fun let me ask you about alien sightings so there's been quite a bit of UFO sightings and all that kind of stuff what do you think would be the first time when humans sight aliens see aliens in a sort of unquestionable way this extremely strong and arguable way we've made contact with aliens Sarah what would it look like obviously the the space of possibilities is huge here but if you were to kind of look into the future what would that look like would it be inklings of UFOs here and there that slowly unravel a mystery or would it be like an obvious overwhelming signal so I think we have an obsession with making contact with events so what I mean by that is you know like people have a UFO sighting they make contact and I always think you know what's interesting to me about the UFO narratives right now is not that I have a disbelief about what people are experiencing or feeling but like the discussion right now is sort of at the level of modern mythology aliens are mythos in modern culture and and when you treat it like that then then I want to think about when do things that we traditionally only regularized through mythology actually become things that become standard knowledge so you know like it used to be you know variations in the climate were described by some kind of gods or something and now it's like you know our technology picks up an anomaly or someone sees something we say it's aliens and I think the real thing is it's not contact with events but like first contact is actually contact with knowledge of the phenomena or the explanation and so this is very subtle and very abstract but when does it become something that we actually understand what it is that we're talking about that's first contact it's not would you make the myth would you give credit to the myth the mythology as first contact because I think yes I think it's the rudimentary that we have some understanding that there's a phenomena that we have to understand and regularize so I think right to understand that there is weather yes you have to construct a pathology around that yes it's something that's controllable like this is a mythology basically as like baby knowledge it could be that you know although there's lots of there's lots of alien sight of so-called alien sightings right so there is number of things you can do you could just dismiss them and say that's not true they're kind of made up or you say well there's some there's something interesting here right we keep seeing the commonality right we see the same phenomena again and again again also this is interesting about human imagination even if they arm let's not say made up but miss misappropriated kind of other inputs the fact that human consciousness is capable of imagining it contact with aliens does that not tell us about something about where we are in our position in our culture in our technology it doesn't know where in time we are could it be that we're making contact with let's say that so let's say let's take the most miserable version there are no aliens in the universe life is only on earth that then the interpretation of that is we're desperate to kind of understand why we're the only life in the universe right the other one is the other most extreme is that aliens are visiting all the time and we just you know we're just not able to capture them coherently or there's a big conspiracy and you know there's the area 51 and there are lizards everywhere and there's that or I'm I kind of in favor the idea that maybe humanity is waking up to the idea that we aren't alone in the universe and we're just running the simulation and we're seeing some evidence you know we don't we don't know what life is yet we are we do have some anomalies out there we can't explain everything and over time you know we will start to unpack that one very plausible thing we might do which might be boring for the average alien in observer believes that aliens are as in intelligent aliens are visiting earth it could be that we might go to the outer solar system and find a new type of life that has completely new chemistry bring these cells back to earth where you can say my hand on earth here's RNA DNA and proteins and look cells self-replicate from Titan we got this new set of molecules new set of cells and we feed it stuff and it grows that for me if we were able to do that which would be like the most that would be my UFO sighting that's a good test so you feed it and it grows yeah we've made so not until you know how to feed the thing it grows somehow we can make a comic book you know the tiger that came for tea the alien that came for tea what would you say is between the two of you is the biggest disagreement about aliens alien life out there is it from the basic framework of thinking about what is life to maybe what aliens look like to alien civilizations to your foresightings what would you think so I would say the biggest one is that um the emergence of life does not have to be that can't just happen once on the planet that it could be two or more life forms present on the planet at once and I think Sarah doesn't agree with that I think that's like logically inconsistent that's really polite nonsense because you think that you're likely is that so the idea that what is what does it look like let's imagine two alien civilizations co-existing on a planet what's that look like exactly so I would say um I think I've got to get around your argument okay yeah let's say let's say that on this planet there's just like there's lots of available chemistry and one life form gets emerges based on carbon it interacts and there's a there's an ecosystem based on carbon and there's an orthogonal um and so it's planetary phenomena which is what you I think right but there's also one that goes on silicon and and because there's enough energy and there's enough stuff that these life forms might not actually necessarily compete um evolutionarily yeah but they would have to not interact at all because they're going to be co-constructing each other's causal chains I think that's what you just got me yeah so there's no so there's no overlap in terms of their causal chains are very limited over yeah so I think the only way I can get away with that is to say right life could emerge on a planet underneath and okay lizard people under the question I think I think I think we let's go I I think but look as you see we disagree so and I think Sarah actually has convinced me because of the that life is a planetary phenomenon the emotional life is a planetary phenomena and and actually um because of the way evolution selection works then nothing occurs in isolation the causal chains interact so there is a common there's a consensus model for life on the earth but you don't think you can place aliens from elsewhere onto the can't you just uh place multiple alien civilizations on one planet right but I think so you can take two origin life events that were independent and co-mingle them but I don't think when you're talking about when you when you look at the interaction of that structure it's it it's like the same idea is like an experiment being an example of life right that's a really abstract and subtle concept and I guess what I'm saying is life is information propagating through matter so once you start having things interacting they in some sense co-mingle and they become part of the same chain so there is a commingling starts quickly yeah proceeds we proceed to co-mingle quickly right right so you you could say so the question is then the more interesting question is are there two distinct origins events and I still think that there's reasons that on a single planet you would have one origins event because of the time scales of cycling of geochemistry on a planet and also the fact that I don't think that the origin of life happens in a pool and like radiates outward through evolutionary processes I think it's a multi-scale phenomena it happens at the level of individual molecules interacting collections of molecules interacting and entire planetary scale cycles so life as we know it has always been multi-scale and there's I'm brilliant examples of individual mutations at the genome level changing global climate right so there's a tight coupling between things that happen at you know the largest scale our planetary scale and the smallest scale that life mediates but it still might be difficult within something you will call as a single civil alien civilization you know different there's species and stuff but I think yeah camp might not be able to communicate but you're asking about life not species right so what's the difference between one living civilization this is almost like a category question yeah versus species because it can be very different in the evolution because there's like island like literally islands that you can involve different kinds of turtles and stuff yeah and they can so I guess what I'm saying is weird if you look at the structure of two interacting living things populations and you look in their past and they have independent origins for their causal chain then you would say one was alien you know they have different independent origins events but if you look at their future by virtue of the fact they're interacting their causal chains have become co-mingled so that in the future they they they are not independent um right right so that's why you would even define them as aliens so the structure across time is two examples of life become one example of life because life is the entire structure across time right but there could be a lot of variation with this yeah so the question we're all interested in is how many independent origins of a complexifying causal chain are there in the universe see but is the idea of origin is easy for you to define because like um well is that when the two when the species split in the evolutionary process and you get like um a dolphin versus a human or neadrethal versus homo sapien isn't there let me make a distinction here um quickly so i think um sorry to interrupt um what we're saying i mean i mean i mean i mean sarah won that argument because she would i think she's right that um once the causal chains interact and going forward so we're talking about a number of things let's go all the way back before origin of life origin life on earth on earth chemistry emerges there's so there's all these i would say there's probably mechanistically the chemistry is desperately trying to find any way to get replicated is the ribosome kind of was really rubbish at the beginning and you just competed competed competing you got better and better ribosome suddenly that was the technology the ribosome is the technology that way boom allowed evolution to start so what i was trying to why interrupted you is say that once evolution has started using that technology then you can speciate and i was trying to and i think what sarah said was convinced me of because i was like no we can have lots of different chemistry shadow biosphere on earth and she's like no no no you have to have this you have to get to this minimum evolutionary machine and then when that occurs speciation occurs exactly what you say dolphins humans everything on earth but when you're looking at aliens or alien life um there's not going to be two different types of chemistry because they compete they compete and interact and cooperate because the causal chains overlap one might kill the other one might combine with the other and then you go on and then you have this kind of um this average and sure there might be re-speciation it might be have two types of emerging chemistry it almost looks like the origin of life on earth required two different pre-life forms the peptide world and the rna world somehow they got together and by combining you got the ribosome and that was the minimum competent entity for evolution and would all alien civilizations have an evolutionary process on a planet so like that's one of the almost it's almost the definition of life to create all those memories you have to have something change in time yeah and but there has to be selection um that's like an efficient there's no other way to do it no i well never saying never because soon i say that's that's the part that depresses me though going back to like i don't know the earlier discussion on violence and things like and i i don't know where somebody was tweeting about this recently but like you know how much stuff had to die maybe it was you yeah ah yeah so so we were talking we're talking about life yeah and uh i guess a lot of murder had to occur right so selection means things had to be weeded out right so well we can celebrate that death makes way for it yeah i mean it and also you know one of the most interesting features of major extinction events in the history of our planet is how much novelty emerged immediately after right so and of course you know a lot of people make arguments we wouldn't be here if the dinosaurs didn't go extinct so um in some ways we can attribute our existence to all of that but i guess i was just wondering and sort of like if i was going to build a universe myself in the most optimistic way would i retain that feature but it does seem to be a you have to i mean i think we're i think we're probably being over um afro-pomorphizing i remember watching uh the blue i think it was the blue planet david at number was showing these seals and because of climate change some seals were falling off a cliff and how tragic that was i was like i'm saying my son that's pretty cool look at look at those ones down there they've obviously got some kind of mutations some and they're not doing that daft thing and so that that that poor gene will be weeded out of course at the individual level it looks tragic and of course as human beings have the ability to abstract and we empathize we don't want to cause suffering on other human beings and we should retain that but we shouldn't look back in time and say you know how many butterflies had to die i remember making this how many if you think about the caterpillar become the chrysalis and then the butterfly getting out how many if that suffering we call it suffering if that process of pruning had not occurred we have no butterflies so none of the butterfly beauty in the world without all that pruning so pruning is required but we shouldn't apro-phomorphize and feel sorry for the biological entities because that's that seems to be a backwards way of looking at it what we should do is project forward and maybe think about what values we have across our species and our ecosystem and our fellow human beings you know you know now that we know that animals suffer at some level think about humane farming when we find that plants can in fact are conscious and can think and have pain then we'll do um humane gardening until that point we won't do it right i like this um famous chemist endorses the majestic nature of murder that's that's the title um i didn't say that but okay well i just insert i have a hard time with it though i think the way you put it it's kind of but it it's the reality of it's the reality of it is beautiful um you know there's an instagram account called nature is metal and i i keep following it on following it because i can't handle it for prolonged periods of time we evolve together you die alone yeah we evolve together well you die alone so i we live alone too it's a gatsby thing i don't know we evolve together where's the together the together is the murder the population the sex and murder my romantic vision of it to try to make me happy sarah instead of sad sarah um i talk in third person when i think very obtractly sorry is um you know like like this whole like you know the like certain things can coexist so the universe is trying to maximize existence but there's some things that just aren't the most productive productive trajectory together but it doesn't mean that they don't exist on another timeline or another chain somewhere else like i like and maybe you would call that like then some kind of multiverse or things but what am i saying i think you can't i just you can't go down a level just making stuff up no you know i don't know better i don't understand it is illogical and we need we know i know i know if you look at bacteria if you look at virus i mean just just the number of organisms that are constantly like looking at bacteria they're just dying non-stop right slaughter right so well and this goes back to the conversation about god i mean like there's the whole thing about like why is the universe enables suffering individuals don't exist right in the so for this i think if you think about life as an entity on earth right let's just just just go back a second i mean i like to i'll be ludicrous for a second i don't exist you don't exist right um but you but the actions you do the product of evolution exists right the objects you create exist quantitatively in the real world if you then understand life on earth or alien life or any life in the universe there's this integrated entity where you need you need cells in your body to die otherwise you'd just get really big and you won't be able to walk around right so you know you do yeah yeah yeah so yeah so i i think uh the patterns that persist not the physical things and of course we you know we have we have we place immense values on fellow human beings and i'm majestic majestic professor does like other individual human beings or now you're talking in third person too i know it happens right so death would just say i mean because you said evolution is a fundamental part of um life so death is a fundamental part of life yeah it might right now it might not be in the future we might hack some aspects of death because and we'll evolve in different ways but isn't there i think sarah mentioned like this life density um is it can't that become a problem like too much too too much bureaucracy too much baggage builds up like you need to keep erasing okay that we dissipate like i don't think of like like i'm just a fake yes no but i mean like like we're so fixated on ourselves as individuals and agents and we were talking about this last night actually um over dinner but like um you know an individual persists for a certain amount of time but what you want to do like if you're really concerned with immortality is not to live indefinitely as an individual but maximize your causal impact so like what are the traces of you that are left and and you're still a real i always think of einstein like for a period of time he was a real physical thing we would identify as a human and now we just see echoes of that human in all the ways that we talk about his you know causal impact or frankly right is another great example how many easter eggs could you leave in the future it's like oh i got you so i guess the the question is how much do you want to control the localization of a certain features of say a prop a packet of propagating information we might call a person and keep them localized to one individual physical structure or do you want to you know is there a time when that just becomes a dissipated feature of the society that it once existed in and i'm okay with the dissipated feature because i i just think uh that makes more room for more creativity in the future so you mentioned engineering life in the lab let me take you to computer science world what about robots so is it possible to engineer so you because you're really talking about like engineering life at the chemistry level but do you think it's possible to engineer a life at the like humanoid level at the at the dog level like or is that like at which level can we instill the magic of life into uh inanimate stuff no i think you could do it at every level i just think that we're particularly interested in chemistry because it's the origin life transition that presumably or at least is how i feel about it's going to give you the most and interesting or deepest insights into the physics but presumably everything that we do and build as an example of life and the question is just how much do you want to take from things that we have now and put them into like examples of life and copy them into machines i don't know i saw that there was this a tweet again uh i think you were at the mars conference and you were hanging out with a humanoid robot yes that was making lots of new friends at mars 2020 do you guys color match ahead of time with the robot or did that accidentally happen accidentally i went up and i wanted to say hi for the voice would that be the correct name for the color i think so we didn't color coordinate our outfits uh well you didn't maybe throw a robot the robot probably did much more stylish so for people who are just listening there's there's a picture of sarah standing next to a humanoid robot i guess you like them with a small head and perfect vision actually no i just um i did their perfect there's a lidar no i mean i think i was just deeply interested because um what was sorry to interrupt it was it manual control was it actually uh stabilizing itself oh no it was walking around oh nice yeah nice it was pretty impressive i mean actually that there's some videos online of jeff bezels walking with one of those across the lawn nearby there so yeah um so i wasn't invited um yeah but um there you go see that's incredible isn't it yeah see you look at the walking robot where did the idea for walking come from it was invented by evolution right and us as human beings able to conceptualize and design and engineer the causal change so that robot is evidence of life and so i think what's going to happen is the um we want to find where the spark comes from mechanistically how can you literally go from sand to cells so that's the first transition i think you know there are a number of problems we want to do make life in the lab great then we want to make life in the lab we want to suddenly start to make intelligent life or life that can solve start to solve abstract problems and then we want to make life um that is conscious okay in that order i think it has to happen that order you know this getting towards this artificial general intelligence i think that artificial general intelligence can't exist in a vacuum it has to have a causal change all the way back to luca right yeah and so the question i think i really like the question is to say what are we how is how is our pursuit of more and more lifelike i know you want to you like your robots you want to project into them you want to interact with them you you i think you would want if you have a robot dog and the robot dog does everything expected of a normal dog and you can't tell a difference you're not really going to ask the question anymore if it's a real dog or not or you it's got a personality you're interacting with it and so i think what would be interesting would be to kind of understand the computational architecture how that evolves because you could then you know teleport the personality from one object to the other and say right is it act the same um and i think that as we go along we're going to get better and better integrating our consciousness into machines well let me ask you that question just to linger on it i would i would call that a living conscious thing potentially i as a human allegedly but you're would you as a person trying to define life if you pass the touring test are you a life form one of the reasons i walked up to the robot was um because i wanted to meet the robot right so i it felt like i was and i i i base a lot of my interaction with reality on emotion and feeling but like like how do you feel about an interaction and i always love your point about like is it enough to have that shared experience with a robot right so so walking up to it does it feel like you're interacting with a living thing and it did to an extent but in some degrees it feels like you're interacting with a baby living thing so i think our relationship with technology in particular robots we build is really interesting because um basically they exist as objects in our future in some sense like we're much older evolutionary lineage than robots are but we're all part of the same causal chain and presumably you know they're kind of in in their infancy so it's almost like you're looking at the future of life when you're looking at them but it hasn't really become life in in in a full manifestation of whatever it is that they're going to become um and you know the the more uh the example of the walking robot was super interesting but they also had a dolphin that they put in the pool at the cocktail party at mars and it looked just like a real dolphin swimming in the pool and um and you know it's in this kind of uncanny valley because and i was having this conversation um with a gentleman named mutu who was super perceptive but he was basically saying like it made him feel really uncomfortable um and i think the dolphin yeah and i think a lot of people would have that response and i guess my point about it is it is kind of interesting because you're basically trying to make a thing that you think is non-living mimic a living thing and so so the thought experiment i would want to run in that case is imagine we replaced every living thing on earth with a robot equivalent like all the dolphins and things and in some sense then you're making if you think that the robots aren't experiencing reality for example in the way that a biologically evolved thing would you're basically making the philosophical zombie argument become real yeah and and basically building reality into a simulation because you've made everything quote unquote fake in some sense you've replaced everything with an emulate a physical simulation of it so as opposed to being excited by the possibility of creating something new you're um terrified of being humans being replaced i was just trying to run like what would be the absolute you know thought experiment but i don't i don't think that scenario would actually play out i guess what i i think is weird for why we feel this kind of uncanny valley interacting with something like the robot dolphin is we're looking at an object we know is kind of in the future in the sense of like if everything's ordered in time but it's borrowing from a structure that we have common history with and it's basically copying in kind of superficial ways things from one part of the causal chain to another yeah well that's that's a video every believed it was real they look so real um and obviously the technology was was developed for movies so but i think we're confusing our emotional response and understanding the causal chain of how we got there right because the philosophical zombie argument thinks about objects just appearing right that you're facsimile in some way whereas there is that caused the chain of events that caused the dolphin to be built went for human being it would uh philosophical zombies still have a high assembly index yeah because it came it can't be philosophical zombies can't like like balsam and brains just can't appear out of nowhere well i guess my question would be in that that scenario where you built all the robots and replace everything on earth with robots with the with the biosphere be as creative under that scenario or not yeah and so are there all are there quantitative differences you would notice over time and it's not obvious either way right it's not obvious right now because we don't really we don't understand we haven't built into machines how we work so that's i think that there are one of the big missing things i think that we're both looking for right it's a cute robot but the point there is that um the biosphere won't be as creative if you did it right now no of course i think that's why but in the but in the future it we will be able to solve the problem of origin of life um intelligence and consciousness um because they exist in physical substrates we just don't understand enough about the material substrate and the causal chain but i'm very confident we will get to an AGI but it won't be what people think it won't be solution won't be a we'll get fooled a lot and so gpt3 is getting better at fooling us and gpt 153 might really fool us but it won't have the magic we're looking for it won't be a creative but it will help us understand the differences between really though because isn't that what love is being fooled like what why why are you not giving much value to the emotional connection with objects with with robots with humans emotion is that thing which happens when you're when you're the uh the funk your expectation function is is dashed and something else happens right i mean that's what emotion is is that what love is too yeah you were expecting one thing and something else happened yeah i don't know i don't think that's true either well what is it then i think no emotion look i'm sorry emotion is that but but i think love is just fulfilling your purpose no but okay i mean look look like whatever that means that's i mean really when i'm talking so yeah okay so when are you happiest it's like when you're all right all right right let me go back if you want if you want me to follow your bliss let me define love quickly okay go for it in terms of assembly space right okay excellent i didn't think i'll be doing this today i can't wait till assembly theory 101 is taught and the second lecture is assembly theory of love no but look but actually but look but it's being surprised the expectation is being broken i'm just i'm not no go for it i'm not i'm not i'm not an emotional being but i would say so let's talk so we'll talk about emotion but love is more complex is love is a very complex set of emotions together and logical stuff but if you've got this thing this person that's on this causal chain that has this empathy for this other thing love is being able to project ahead in your assembly space and work out what you're the person you're in love with has a need for and to do that for them without selflessly right because you can project ahead what they're going to need and they are there and you and maybe you can see someone is going to fall over and you catch them before they fall over or maybe you can anticipate that someone's going to be hungry and without helping you you just help them that's what it just sounds like empathy but it's more complex than that right it's more complex it's more about not just empathy it's understanding it's about kind of sharing that experience expression of love though that's not what it's like to feel love like feeling love is like i like i think it's like when you're aligned with things that you feel like are your purpose or your reason for existing so if you have those feelings uh towards the robot why is that rope i mean because you said the aj will build an aji but it won't there'll be a fundamental difference in aji i don't think we'll build it it's going to merge from our technology i think you guys all are doing the same thing i just said that gpt that we do not correctly capture the causal chain that we have within gpt yeah within i don't you think it captures because gpt3 is fundamentally trained on a corpus of knowledge you know like the internet don't you think it it gets better and better better capturing the memory of all it will be better at falling you and at some point you won't care but when it comes i my guess this is a quick as all i was getting to right before we got i got in the love trap the love trap it was like like be croning in the love trap you know um sounds like a good fan that makes it sad okay it's sad assembly space of sad no um is that so short but i think there are other features that allow that we pull on innovation that allow us to do more than what we just see in gpt3 so if you're being fooled there so i think what i mean is human beings have this ability to be surprising and creative whereas is it dali this thing or or if you take um gpt3 is not going to create a new verb shakespeare created new verbs you're like wow and that required shakespeare to think outside of language in a different domain so i think having that connections across multiple domains is what you need for agi yeah but i don't know if you need um that i don't know if there's any limitations gpt gpt and not being able to be cost domain the number one problem is um it's instantiated in a resource limited substrate and that we don't in silicon um it is it is the the architecture is used for training for learning it is about falling it's not about understanding and i think that there is some understanding that we have that is not yet symbolically representable language learning language and using language seems to be fundamentally about fooling not understanding what why um why do you use language exactly i might disagree with that quite fundamentally actually um but i don't i i'm not sure i understand how i make a coherent argument for that but my feeling is that there is there are there is comprehension in reality in our consciousness below language and and we use those for language for all sorts of expressions and we don't yet understand that there's a gap we will get there but i'm saying wouldn't it be interesting it's a bit like saying could i facsimile you or sarah into a new human being right and and let's just say i could copy all your atoms and the positions of all your atoms electrons into into this other person they would be you the answer is no and it's quite easy to show using assembly theory because actually the feature space that you have that graph the only way to copy you is to create you on that graph so everything that's happened to you in your past we have to have a faithful record for if you want another copy of lex you have to do the exact thing one another copy sarah one other copy lee the exact past has to be replicated let me push back on that a little bit that's maybe from an assembly theory perspective but it i don't think it's that difficult to recreate a version of me like a clone that would make everybody exactly equally as happy like they wouldn't care which one and like there's two of me and then they get to pick which one and they'll kill you the one they'll be fine as long as they're forced to kill they'll be fine but here's what will happen is let's say we make artificial lex and it was like wow it's so cool it looks the same interact then there'll be this battle of like right we're going to tell the difference we're gonna we're gonna basically keep nudging lex and artificial lex until we get in novelty from one and we'll kill the other one and i think thank you we're not novelty is a fuzzy concept that's the this whole problem of novelty so i will define novelty it's not as fuzzy novelty is the ability for you to create architectures that are or create an architecture so let's say you've got a corpus of architectures known you can write down you've got some distance measure and then i create a new one and the distance measure so far away from what you'd expected is there's there's no linear algebra going to get there it's like that is creativity and we don't know how to do that yet on any level well i was also thinking about like your argument about free will like you wouldn't be able to know it was it doesn't work instantaneously it's not like a micro level thing but more a macro level thing over the scale of trajectories or longer term decisions so if you think that the novelty manifests over those longer time scales it might be the two lexes diverge quite a bit over certain time scales of their behavior even though you would notice the difference they might not and the universe the earth won't notice the difference the universe won't notice the universe would notice the difference no the universe doesn't know about its novelty that's being generated that's the whole point of what this is what selection is right it's like taking nearly equivalent ones and then deciding like the universe selects right so whatever selection is select some things to persist in time yeah it's gonna select the artificial one so it's because it likes that one better well you're mixing up two arguments here so look let's go back a second what are you facing this argument on my i'm just saying that i kind of don't think because at least said that it's not possible like if you uh the the if you copy every single molecule in a person's body that's not going to be the same person that that they won't have the same assembly index it won't have it won't be the same person and i just don't i think copying you can compress not only do i disagree with that i just i think you can even compress a person down to some where you can fool the universe i'm saying let me restate it it is not possible to copy somebody on because you unless you copy the causal history also you can't have two identical i mean actually i really like the idea that everything in the universe is unique so even if like there were two I know you like that idea because you're human and you think you're unique yeah exactly but also i can make a logical argument for it that even if we could copy you know all of your molecules in all their positions the other you would be there and you have a different position in space and the other you're distinguishable yeah the other thing how unique are you just by the position in space really sure but then how interesting is that light translation of lex well that's not an interesting i see but but no wait wait a minute is part of the definition of something being interesting is how much it affects the future yes yes but let me come back don't you agree but let me come back do you disagree one point quickly that you were making sure i think i probably agree yes if there's two lexus right there's a robot lex that you just basically it's a it's a it is a charade it's a facsimile it's just coded to emulate you are you robot lex i wouldn't know right let's get there's a very very important point here because he's he's ducking and diving between this eye so so if i facsimile due into a robot then it would your robot might be would be a representation of you now but fundamentally be boring because you go and have other ideas if however you built an architecture there's itself as capable of generating novelty you would diverge in your causal chain and you're both be equally interesting to interact with yeah we don't know that mechanism all i'm trying to say is we don't yet know that mechanism we do not know the mechanism that generates novelty and at the moment in our ais we are emulating we are not generating you don't think we're sneaking up on that do you think there's a there is no ghost in the machine and i want there to be one i want the same thing you want sorry i was i know you want that as a human because everything you just said makes you feel more special i want to be no no screw my specialness i just want to be surprised if i you don't think a robot can surprise you if i if you can produce an algorithm instantiated and robots surprise me i will i will i will i will i will i will have one of those robots would be brilliant but they won't it won't surprise me but why why is it a problem to think that humans are special maybe it's not the special you're right it's the better than yes because then you start to not recognize the magic in other life forms that you either have created or you have observed because i just think there is magic and uh legged robots moving about and they are full of surprises yeah so this is yeah so i'm a little uh i know where you like to sell your automata right but the the specialness in your robot comes from the roboticist that built it yeah it's part of the lineage yeah and so that's fine i'm happy with that that's what i felt like looking at the standing robot was i was looking at four billion years of evolution yeah right if it wasn't yeah so i think i'm happy i mean i'm happy we're going to coexist i'm just saying you're going to get more excitement there's something missing in our understanding of intelligence intelligence isn't just training uh the way the neural network is conceived right now is gray and it's lovely and it'll be better and we will argue forever but you want to know wouldn't it be great if i said look i know how to invent an architecture and i can give it a soul and what i mean by a soul is some i know for real that there is internal reference as soon as i not fake internal reference and if we could generate that mechanism for internal reference that's why our goal direct direct that's why you have to we can do that for goal direct in us get that goal directness you would love that robot more than the one that's just made to look like it does because you'll have more fun with it because you better generate search other problems get more novelty hell you'll be able to fall in love with that robot for real but not the one that's faking it what about fake it till you make it well i think a lot of people fall in love with with um with with fake humans it's nice to it's nice to fall in love with something that's full of novelty yes i i you know i could imagine all kinds of robots that i would want to have a close relationship with and i don't mean like sexual i mean like intimacy because but i just don't think that um novelty generation is such a special okay there's like mathematical novelty or something like that and then there's just humans being surprised and i think we're easily surprised that's fine but that's that but you don't think that's a good definition no that's good i'm happy to be surprised um but not globally surprised because someone else but i really want i was why i'm a scientist i really want to be the first to be surprised about something and the first thing in the first in the universe to create that novelty and to know for sure that that novelty has never occurred anywhere else that's a real buzz right that's a way to really know that i you have to have a really big lookup table right yeah you're never going to be know for sure right that's that's one of the hard things about being and scientists searching for this type of novelty maybe that's why mathematics mathematicians love discovery but actually they are creating and then when they create a new mathematical structure that they can then they can you can you can write code to work out whether there's whether that structure exists before that that's almost why i would love to have been a mathematician from that regard to invent new math that really i know pretty much for sure to not exist does not exist anywhere else in the universe because so contingent right but this gets into like you are you said a few times and i still really don't understand how you actually plan to do this to build an experiment that detects how the universe is generating novelty or that time is the mechanism so the the problem that we all have which i think is what lex is pushing against is if i built the experiment you don't know what you put into it so you don't know what like if you unless you can quantify everything you put in all of your agency all the boundary conditions you don't know if you somehow biased it in some way so is the novelty actually intrinsic to that experiment or to that robot or is it something you gave it but you didn't realize it's gonna be it's gonna asymptote towards that right you're never gonna know for sure but you can start to take out you know you can use good Bayesian approaches and just keep updating and updating and updating until you point to one sense of purpose so you want to bound on how much novelty generation it could be yeah got it so the ability generating novelty is correlated with high assembly index with assembly index yeah and yeah because the space possibilities is bigger so um that's the key this could be a good uh so i have a running joke of like why lex is single this could be a good part for uh so so what you're looking for in a robot partner is ability to generate novelty and that's i suppose you would say it's a good definition of intelligence too um boys novelty a um a fuzzy concept is creativity better yeah i mean it's that's all pretty fuzzy it's kind of the same maybe that's why aliens haven't come yet is because we're not creating enough novelty like there's some kind of a hierarchy of novelty in the universe well i think novelty is like things surprise you right so it's a very passive thing but i guess i would remember by saying creativity is i think it's much more active like you think there's like a mechanism of like the things that exist are generating the creativity novelty seems to be there's some spontaneous production it has it's completely decoupled from the things that exist no i i understand i i think that's really really good creativity is the mechanism and novelty is the observable yeah novelty could just be surprised your model of the world was broken and not necessarily in a positive way that's the prize so there's three things now let's go back that's cool right let's go you got surprise which is basically i'm i don't i mean i'm surprised all the time because i don't read very much i'm pretty dumb i was like oh wow this i often used to invent new scientific you know ideas and i was really surprised by that and then when looking at the picture properly and it's there so surprise that's to the extent that you don't have full information um creativity the act of pushing on that um kind of on the causal structure and novelty which is measuring that degree right so i think that's pretty well defined in that regard so you want your robot i mean and in the end that's why actually the way the internet and the printing press share some um i actually think creativity has dropped a bit since it creates since the internet because everyone's just just you know just regurgitating stuff but of course now it's beginning to accelerate again because everyone's using this tool to be creative and boom is exploding i think that's what happens when you create these new technologies that's really that's really helpful there's a difference between novelty and surprise okay i was i think i was thinking about surprise if you give me a toy that surprises me for a bit it'd be great robot surprises me you know experiment that surprises you know i mean that's why i love doing experiments because i'm i can't it's still exciting surprise is exciting yeah even negative surprise like some people love drama in relationships like it's like why the hell why why'd you do this that can be exciting i could imagine companies selling updates to their their companion robots that just basically generate negative surprise just to just spice things up a bit yeah it's the push and pull that's that's one of the components of love as you said love is a complicated thing oh uh beauty i wanted to mention this because you also tweeted i think this was sarah no it might have been lee i don't remember but it was a survey published in nature showing that scientists uh find yeah um anyway there's uh there's a plot this is published in nature of what scientists find beautiful in their work and it separates biologists and physicists it'd be nice if he showed the full plot and there's simplicity elegance hidden order uh inner logic of systems symmetry complexity harmony and so on um is there any interesting things that stand out to you i think the fact that biologists like complexity and pleasing colors oh there's pleasing colors on there yeah yeah or shapes or shapes please and colors and then uh physicists obviously love simplicity above all else simplicity elegance they love symmetry and then biologists love complexity and uh well they just love a little bit less they love everything a little bit less but complexity a little bit more a little bit more that's so interesting and pleasing colors or shapes do you think it's a useful i i forget what your tweet was that this is missing some of the oh no i think i it's because i think about how um explanations become causal to our future so i have this whole philosophy that um the theories we build and the way we describe reality should be have the largest breadth of possibilities for the future of what we can accomplish so in some sense it's not like ockham's razor is not for simplicity it's for optimism or the kind of future you can build and so i think um i think you have to think this way when you're thinking about life and alien life because ultimately we're trying to build i mean science is just basically our narratives about reality and now you're building a narrative that is what we are as physical systems it seems to me it needs to be as positive as possible because it's basically going to shape the future trajectory where we're going and we don't use that as a heuristic in theory building because we think theories um are about predicting features of the world not causing them but if you look at the history of all of the development of human thought it's caused the things that happen next so it's not just about looking at the world and observing it it's about actually that feedback loop that's missing and it's not in any of those categories what do you think is the most beautiful idea in the physics of life in the chemistry of life in this um through all your exploration with assembly theory what is the um the thing that made you step back and say this is this this um idea is beautiful or potentially beautiful for me it's that the universe is a creative place i guess i i want to think and whether it's true or not is that we are special in some way and it's not like an arbitrary added on epi phenomena or ad hoc feature of the universe that we exist but it's something deep and intrinsic to the structure of reality um and to me the most beautiful ideas that come out of that is that the the reason we exist is for the universe to generate more things and to think about itself and use that as a mechanism for creating more stuff um that's for me uh so like the life that this however common it is is an intrinsic part is a fundamental part of this universe at least that we live in i think so i mean it's always interesting to me because um you know like we have theories of quantum mechanics and gravity and they're supposed to be like our most fundamental theories right now and they describe you know things like the interaction of massive bodies or the way that charges accelerate or all these kind of features and and they're these really deep theories and they tell us a lot about how reality works but they're they're completely agnostic to our existence and i just i can't help but think that like whatever describes us has to be even deeper than that um and i i think incorporating memory i guess causality whatever the term you want to use into the the physics view of the world might be that's the easiest way to do it it's the it's the cleanest so here we go again with the physicists i'm a physicist the clean i was going to say the simplest most elegant way of resolving all of the kind of ways that um we have we have these paradoxes associated with life when you it's not that life is not um current physics is not incompatible with life but it doesn't explain life and then you you want to know where are the explanatory gaps and this idea that we have an assembly that time is fundamental and and objects actually are extended in time and have physical extent in time is the cleanest way of resolving a lot of the explanatory gaps so i i i've been struck i struggled with assembly theory for many years because i could see this gap um and i think when i first met sarah and we realized we were kind of talking about the same problem but we were we understood none of the language it was quite hilarious actually because it's like look i have no idea what you're talking about but i think it's sounds right so for me the most beautiful thing about assembly theory is i realized the assembly theory explains why the universe why life is the universe developing a memory but not only that poetically i could actually go measure it and i was like holy shit we were just we physically measured this thing abstract this abstract thing and we could measure it and not only could we measure it but we can then start to quantify the causal consequences um because i mean you know i i think as a kind of inventing this together with sarah and her team you know i thought there was a quite a high chance that you know we're doing science there's such a high probability we're wrong you know on this and i remember kind of trying to go to hard physicists mathematicians complexity theorists and everyone just kind of giving me such a hard time about it and said you know this is kind of this is you've just done this you've just done that it's it's you know if you've just recapitulated an old theory and i and i was unable i lacked the language to really explain and i had to it was a real struggle so this realization that life what life does that physics cannot understand all chemistry is the universe develops a memory that's causally actionable and then we can measure it but it isn't just a one thing there is this intrinsic property of all the objects in the universe like like i've said before but you know me holding up this water bottle isn't any other water bottle but it is a sum total of all the water bottles that have existed right and will likely change the future of water bottles and for other objects so it's that this kind of so for me assembly theory explains the soul in stuff the monology but it is the monology is not like sheldrake's morphic resonance where we have this kind of wooey thing permeating the universe it is the interaction of objects of other objects and some objects have more instantaneous causal power that's life living things and some objects are the instantaneous output of that causal power dead objects but they're part of the lineage and that for me is fascinating and they're really beautiful and i and i think that um even if we're determined to be totally wrong i think that will help us help hopefully understand what life is and go into tech life elsewhere and make life in the lab how does that make you feel by the way does it make you feel less special that you're so deeply integrated interconnected to the lineage i mean i can one level i just wanted in my life as a scientist i wanted to have an interesting idea just once or an original idea i mean it was like you know uh so i think that was cool that we had this idea and we were playing with it and i think also that um i i kind of i mean it took me ages to realize that sarah had also had the same kind of form coming towards the same formulation just from a completely different point because um but no it makes me feel special and it also makes me feel connected to the universe it also makes me feel not just humble about you know being a living object in the universe but the fact that it makes me really optimistic about what the universe is going to do in the future because we're not just isolated phenomena we are connected i will be able to have you know one of my small objectives in life is to change the future of the universe in some profound way just by existing yeah that's not ambitious at all um i think it's also good because it makes me feel less lonely because i just realized i'm not like i mean i'm a unique assembly structure but i have so much overlap with the other entities i interact with that we're not completely individual right and yet your existence does have a huge amount of impact on the how this whole thing unrolls on the future of the world as individuals that's yeah but i was going to say local packets of agency i think we all have a profound impact on the future some more than others right all human beings all life and i mean that's why i think it's a privilege in a way for you know to say to assert some degree of ego and agency you know i'm gonna make a computer or make an origin life machine or we can do this thing but actually it's just like you know life's probably living so if there is a god or there's a soul in everything it's probably laughing at us going i fool these guys by giving them ego so they strive for this stuff and look what it does for you know the assembly space of the universe and there's always a possibility that science can't answer all of it so that part's challenging for me there might be a limit to this thing let me ask you a bunch of ridiculous questions and i demand relatively short answers lee what's the scariest thing you've ever done or what's the scary thing that pops to mind giving lecture giving giving seminars in front of other scientists that's yeah that is terrifying i could if i had more time i would ask you about the most embarrassing but we'll spare you uh what about you sarah scariest thing um up there some of the scary things you've done um actually the scariest for me was deciding i wanted to get divorced because it was like a totally radical like um life transformation yeah because we had been married for a really long time um and i think it was just so much like i realized like so much of my individual agency i didn't realize i had before and that was just really like scary like empowering scary but like terrifying like you were living in a kind of one way for your whole life and then you realize your life could be a different way and yeah there's a between humans i mean that's the the the beautiful thing about love is the the connection you have but it's also becomes a dependency and breaking that whether it's a mentor with your parents your friends waking up like like just there's a different reality yeah that was scary reinventing yourself okay if you could leave maybe i'll actually will alternate sarah if you could be someone else for a day someone alive today you haven't met yet haven't met yet or maybe you could do one who you've met who would it be kim kardashian no joke the woman's brilliant i would just like to experience like i just i think she's got such an interesting uh and very deep understanding of social reality but you also said you have uh appreciation of love for fashion i do but that but that's actually the same like i just think it's really interesting because we live in a social reality which is completely artificially constructed and some people are really genius about moving through that and i think she's particularly good i wonder if she's good at understanding her if she's i think it's very deeply intrinsic to her so i don't know she happens like surfing away how much cognitive awareness she has of it or how strategic it is but i think it's deeply fascinating so i guess that's the first one that comes fine uh what about you lee if you could be somebody for a day don't say yoshua bak don't say kim kardashian all right let's do off the table off the table no i was gonna say i would like to like to be a uh does it have to be here today i was gonna say i'd like to be um the latest um uh arm processor interesting i would like to be the latest arm processor i'd like to understand what i would like to know what it feel like to basically you like being objects i like being i've always obsessed with being objects ever since i was a kid what's the best part of being an arm processor for a day i mean i'd like to understand how i access my memory what it anticipates coming next in clock cycles what about how it feels like yeah i wonder how it feels like yeah to be to be useful to be thanks for that all right um if uh lee if everyone on earth disappeared and it was just you left what would your days look like what would you do nobody else left to impress nobody no probably can't really do any real science at scale what would you do with your remaining day every possible tool i could and put it in my workshop and just make stuff as so try to make stuff just try and make stuff make companions i'm probably not making companions probably yeah it's in the physical space yeah what about you sir what would you when you're just left alone on earth you're the animals in this scenario nothing no living beings no plants no plants oh interesting i was gonna say i would just i would try to walk the entire planet at least all the land mass well this that's true so you probably don't know if there's stuff you could be you could be searching for plants or other humans what would i eat it's uh you just have a realistic scenario just no but i would allotment i would just walk all the time of soylent i don't know why i just walk that's just became a line i would just walk and i guess i would make a goal of covering all of the entire earth because what else are you going to do with your time what's the item on your bucket list sarah that you haven't done yet but you hope to do um skydiving i traveled to space um i don't know you know what's funny with my bucket list i only know it was on my bucket list once i check it off once you check it off so your bucket list is like a fog it's like a mystery yeah almost by doing it yeah so it's very subconsciously driven um so it's in your subconscious in there i think you're bringing it to the surface i think most of the steering of our agency is in our subconscious anyway so i just kind of go with the flow but i guess um no seriously yeah no i get it i don't know i guess i would like to go in a submarine like to the bottom of the ocean i think that'd be really cool to the bottom of the ocean are you captivated by the mystery of the ocean like i am yeah yeah what about you lee what uh item on your bucket list i don't have a bucket list but i've just made one i would love to take a computer to the moon or mars and make drugs off world be the first cameras to make drugs off world the first drug manufacturer in space yeah why not drugs do they have to be somehow like be able to habitate like to be able to survive on that particular space or like what's the connection between being on mars and do i just would like to be that i'd like to take um the ability to make have command and control over chemicals programmatically off earth to somewhere else in the universe that just seems like you like difficulty engineering uh problems before i die if i can do that would you travel to space be free yeah yeah that's what i'm saying i'd love to go into space but not just to be a tourist i want to take scientific experiment in space and do a thing in space that never been done before that's a real possibility yeah yeah so that's why there's no point in listing things i can't do yeah all right what small act of kindness were you once shown that you will never forget small act of kindness not big somebody was just kind to you somebody did something sweet me when i was a phd student um someone helped me out with uh just i was basically i needed a computer i needed some power computation power and someone took pity on me and helped me and gave me i was really touched they didn't have to and they're actually quite um they're a disabled scientist they would have had other things to do rather than help some random phd student gave me access taught me a lot of stuff yeah actually when when you're a grad student or when you're a student when you're even a student yeah the younger it is the better uh the attention the the support the love you get from from an older person a teacher something like that is super powerful fascinating and like uh from the perspective of the teacher they might not realize the impact they have but that little bit those few words uh a little bit of help can have a have a lot of impact what about you sarah um somebody give you a free starbucks at some point i love free starbucks i like it when you're like in the line at starbucks and somebody buys your coffee in front of you and then you buy the next one i love those but yeah uh that's not my example those are great too yeah it makes me happy and now my kids get all excited when we do it when we go in we're the first ones in line doing it but um uh um i guess i i can use a similar example about just being a student um uh so paul davies um is a very well known theoretical physicist and i um um uh you know he was generous enough with his time to take me on as a postdoc um but before i became his postdoc he invited me to a workshop at arizona state university in the beyond center and um took a walk with me around campus just to talk about ideas after and i think um there were two things that were completely generous about uh that one is um paul's philosophy is always interacting with young people is like you interact with a mind in the room it doesn't matter um you know how well known or whatever it's like you you evaluate the person for the person so um but he also gave me a book uh the urie silence that he had written and he wrote in it um this is how ee gets to et um which was inanity america excess which i worked on as a phd student was the origin of homochirality um all the way up to what the book was about which was are we alone in the universe and is there intelligent life out there and it was just so much about the questions i wanted to ask because it's like it was just everything about like just it was it was just really really kind like that it's okay to ask these questions yeah and you can actually yeah i mean i think a lot of my career is mostly his encouragement to ask deep questions like he gave me the space to do it in ways that a lot of previous mentors had i mean i have i've had a good experience with mentors but it was like go off the deep end ask the hardest questions and i think that's the best gift you can give somebody what would you because you're both fascinating minds and not i would say uh non-standard in the best possible way is there advice you can give to young folks how to be non-standard how to stand out novelty how to generate novelty that's what i want on my tombstone i have one um he he generated novelty no no how to it's like how to how still um i just love doing science and so when i was younger i was just a just wanted to i mean i'm still not sure i'm a real scientist right so i want to try so my advice for the young people is just if you just if you love asking questions then don't be afraid to ask the question even if it pisses people off because if you piss people off you're probably asking the right question what i would say though is don't do what i do which is just piss everyone off try and work out how to you know i think if you're if other people are challenged by your questions you will get not only respect but people will give you create space for you because you're doing something really new i really try to create space in my academic career my my team really try and praise them and push them to do new things so my advice is try to do new things get feedback and the universe will help you because the universe likes novelty i think so i think so right if this one will keep them around what about you sarah um you two like to ask the really out there yeah uh because i have a strong passion for them so i think um uh it goes back to the love like if you if you're doing the thing you're supposed to be doing you should really love it um so i always tell people that they should do the thing they're most passionate about but i think a flip side of that is that's when you become uh in some might like not so cheesy but like your best version of yourself so i guess like for me as i become more successful in my career i feel like i can be more myself as an individual and so there's this i've always been following the questions i'm most interested in which very early on i was discouraged from knowing by many people because they thought they were unanswerable questions and i always just thought well if no one's even trying to answer them of course they're going to be unanswerable and then that was kind of an odd viewpoint but the more i i found my way in that space the more i also made a space for myself as a person because you're basically generating the niche that you want to exist in um and so i think um i think that's that's part of it is not just to follow your passion but also think about like who do you want to be and create that yeah who am i who do you want to be i mean yeah play temporally with it yeah who am i now who do i want to be now but who do i want to be in the future they're not decoupled yeah i always wonder if that's like if i become something am i finding myself or am i creating myself yeah and i think those are somehow the same kind of thing i do feel often like that i was always meant to be this kind of thing yeah but um is that created or discovered i don't know but basically go towards that direction if you were abducted by aliens sarah excellent i'm waiting they're on a spaceship there and then they somehow figured out the language you speak um and ask you what are what are you what is what explain yourself not you sarah but the species oh what's life on earth uh like we we don't have time we're busy grad students from another uh planet i see what what what's interesting about human civilization what's interesting about you oh you specifically too they could be very kind of personal kind of pushy um and yeah how how would you i guess i would describe okay um i have one um because you know like at late obviously i self-identify as a scientist and a physicist but intrinsically i feel more like an artist but it's almost like you're an artist that you don't know what you're painting yet um and i guess i feel like that's humanity like in in some sense we're we're we're creating something i think is profound and potentially very beautiful like existence in the universe but we're just so night like not night we're just early we're we're early we're we're young we don't know what we're doing yet yeah what's with the nuclear weapons is a big question too like what are you guys what are we doing with them why this creativity that you talk is it's all very nice but it's your we're making things that are like very destructive and like the rockets what this seems very aggressive yeah i know this is my my blinders on um i don't know i i mean it goes back to the whole conversation about stuff right i have a hard time uh regularizing certain aspects of reality into what i want to envision and that's obviously problematic but you know nuclear power has also given us a lot of good things so um so both that's human nature both both human beings and the technology we create has the capacity for evil and the capacity yeah we can't all be good all the time i mean there's like this huge misnomer that you need to be liked by everyone universally and obviously that's like an ideal but it's physically impossible you like you can't get a group of people in the room and have everyone like each other all the time so i think that kind of tension is actually really important um that we have different aesthetics um different goals uh and and sometimes conflict comes out of that yeah speaking of which uh do you Lee and Yoshua Bach ever say anything nice to each other or is it always conflict we never have conflict we argue but i don't i don't think they argue arguments are bad it's like i mean i think the problem i have not a problem i think here we go and he's not here to defend himself no i just i don't necessarily understand the the i mean he's just talking at such a high level you know there's i'm a dimwit so i'm like i spend some so i think a lot of our conflict it's not conflict we actually we actually have a i think i mean i can't speak for you actually i have a deep appreciation for him he's brilliant but i i think i'm kind of frustrated and i'm trying to he thinks the universe is a computer and i want to turn the universe into a computer yeah that's that's a small disagreement so what what would you how would you defend your life to an alien when you're being abducted would you focus on the specifics of your life no no no i would be i would try to be as random as possible or try and confuse them oh good good excellent that might be the wiser choice the easter eggs in reality no i mean if aliens will play dumb would you play dumb i would try and be as random as i would try and do something that would surprise the hell out of them which i thought i mean it probably might risk it they might kill me but i think that might be funny that might yeah they might want to study you for prolonged periods my reasoning is if i wanted to stay alive okay so if the thing is if i wasn't going back to earth and the job was to stay alive if i could be as surprising as possible they keep me around like a pet right pet lee on the alien's so you'd be okay being being a pet well no but i mean the last but last human that survives would just be a pet to the alien i don't know but i mean i think um that might be fun because then that might might i might get some feedback from their curiosity but yeah let me ask you this question it given our conversation has a very different meaning not a more profound need perhaps but would you rather lose all of your old memories or never be able to make new ones i would have to um lose all my old memories again it's the novelty um what about you sir i'm the same because i don't think like it's about the future experience right and in some sense like you were saying earlier most of our lived experience is actually in our memories so if you can't generate new memories it's like you're not alive anymore um that's it yeah what comforts you on bad days when you look at human civilization when you look at your own life what gives you hope what makes you feel good about what we're doing about life at the small scale of you as a human and at the big scale of us as a human civilization may be the big scale of the universe children my kids but i i also mean that in like a grand sense of like not a grant but like like if future minds in some sense so for me like the most bleak movie ever you know people worry about apocalyptic things like ai existential risk in climate change was children of men you know the whole premise of the movie was there can be no children born on the entire planet and the youngest person on the planet is like 18 years old or something like can you imagine a world without children it's just it's harrowing that's the scariest thing so i think um what gives me hope is always youth and um the the hope of children and the you know the possibilities of the future they see and they grow up in a completely different reality than adults do um and i i think we have a hard time seeing what their reality actually looks like but i i think i think most of the time it's super interesting yeah they have dreams they have imagination and they have this kind of excitement yeah so it's so cool it's so fun to watch and yeah yeah you feel like you're almost getting in the way yeah of all that uh imagination what about you lee what gives you hope so when i go back to my eight-year-old self the thing that i dreamed of as my eight-year-old self was this world in which technology became programmable when there was an internet and i get information and i would expand my consciousness by just just you know um getting access to everything that was going on and this happened in my lifetime i mean really do have that i mean okay there's some bad things you know there's tiktok everyone just don't whatever all the bad things about social media but i think um i mean i'm i can't quite believe my luck being bored now so amazing being able to program reality in some way yeah and the thing that i really find fascinating about human beings is that just how ingenious they are i'm you know whether it's from my my kids my research group my peers are the companies just how ingenious everyone is and um and i'm pretty sure humanity has a or our causal chain in which humanity is a vital part in the future is going to have a lot of fun and i'm just yeah it's just it's just mind-blowing just to watch and you know so humans are ingenious and i i hope to help them be more ingenious if i can well what gives me hope what makes me feel good on bad days is the existence of wild minds like yours novelty generators assembly structures that generate novelty and do so beautifully and then tweet about it uh sarah this i really really enjoyed talking to you i enjoy following you i'm a huge fan sarah lee i hope i hope to talk to you many times in the future maybe with your shabok you're just incredible people thank you for everything you do you're awesome thank you for talking today i really really appreciate it relax yeah pretty good to be here thanks for listening to this conversation with sarah walker and lee kronan to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from arthur c clark two possibilities exist either we are alone in the universe or we are not both are equally terrifying and let me if i may add to that by saying that both possibilities at least to me are both terrifying and exciting and keeping these two feelings in my heart is a fun way to explore to wander to think and to live always a little bit on the edge of madness thank you for listening i hope to see you next time you