 The following is a conversation with Ben Askren, wrestler, MMA fighter, and a brilliant, opinionated, and fun personality in the world of martial arts. And yes, he occasionally likes to talk a little trash. Given his wild online antics and his boxing match with Jake Paul, some people may forget just how dominant he was in the sport of wrestling and in MMA for most of his career. In wrestling, he is a two-time NCAA division one national champion and four-time finalist. In mixed martial arts, he went undefeated for 10 years with a record of 19-0 before losing to Jorge Mazvidal with the flying knee that caught everyone by surprise. He's also into cryptocurrency, disc golf, and is the co-host of Flow Wrestling Radio Live. And now onto the full ad reads, as always, no ads in the middle. I try to make these interesting, but if you skip them, please still check out our sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Notion, a note-taking and team collaboration tool that I can't believe is actually sponsoring this podcast given how amazing they are. It combines note-taking, document sharing, wikis, project management, and much more into one space that's simple, powerful, and beautifully designed. There's a lot of note-taking apps out there, and I talk to a lot of people that do similar things that I do. They're like really into organizing their ideas, which is what note-taking is. And so many people love Notion. So if you don't wanna take my word for it, take the word of the internet, they love Notion. And Notion is running a special offer just for startups. Get up to $1,000 off Notion's team plan by going to Notion.com slash startups. To give you a sense, that's almost a year free Notion for a team of 10. Go to Notion.com slash startups. That's Notion.com slash startups. This show is also brought to you by NI, formerly known as National Instruments. NI is a company that has been helping engineers solve the world's toughest challenges for 40 years. Their motto is engineer ambitiously, one of my favorite models ever. They have a podcast called Testing 123. They have amazing articles at NI.com slash perspectives covering engineers and innovators and just talking about their whole process from origin story to the success, going through the testing processes of fail and fail and fail again until you get it right as part of the rigorous process of perfection, chasing perfection. It's the design meeting the harsh truth of reality over and over and over until you get to that product that works great and reliably, is resilient to the conditions of the real world. That's why I love engineering. That's why I really enjoy NI and their amazing slogan of engineer ambitiously. Do that at NI.com slash perspectives. That's NI.com slash perspectives. This episode is also brought to you by Onnit, a nutrition supplement and fitness company. They make alpha brain. Maybe you've heard of it, which is a nootropic that helps support memory, mental speed and focus. I use it as a boost when thinking about a difficult problem on a deep work session that I anticipate to be two, three, four hours, so long and then, at least longer than 90 minutes. And I know that it's going to be a particularly challenging problem when thinking through stuff, dead ends to me are the most difficult because you have to stop, you have to calmly back up and start again. I mean, that's really difficult. Through that maintaining focus, keeping a clear, calm mind is essential. So alpha brain really helps me with that. Even though I keep mumbling and not speaking clearly, I assure you, my mind is at least somewhat does a little bit less mumbling, it's a little bit clearer. And once again, that's what alpha brain can help with. Go to lexfreedman.com slash on it to get up to 10% off alpha brain. That's lexfreedman.com slash on it. This episode is also brought to you by 8Sleep and it's PodPro mattress. It controls temperature with a nap, is packed with sensors and can cool down to as low as 65 degrees on each side of the bed separately. It's really up there, to be honest, in terms of joys in life, is a good power nap on a cold bed with a warm blanket with a little bit of air conditioning, but really the cold bed is where the magic is at. Just having a tough day, just being worn out by thinking, worn out by physical activity, and just a nap of 30 minutes just cures everything. I love it. And the same goes for sleep. A great sleep experience, a cold bed, whether that's for a power nap or full night sleep, it's just magic. It can track a bunch of metrics like heart rate variability, but cooling alone is worth the money. Go to 8sleep.com slash Lex, this Black Friday and Cyber Monday to save on the biggest sale of the year. That's 8sleep.com slash Lex. This show is also brought to you by NetSuite. NetSuite allows you to manage financials, HR, inventory, e-commerce, and many more business-related details all in one place. Running a company. I think it's really, really difficult and not because of the idea development, not because of the innovation and design and engineering, all the things that I love dearly. It is difficult for that, but it is also difficult because of all the, maybe you want to say minutia, the management of the details, the administrative task, the financials, the human resources, all the business-related details. That's really tough. And using the right tools, having the right team of getting that kind of stuff done makes the difference between a business that runs well and not. Anyway, right now, Special Financing is back. Head to NetSuite.com slash Lex to get their one-of-a-kind financing program. That's NetSuite.com slash Lex. NetSuite.com slash Lex. This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Ben Askren. ["The Lex Friedman Show"] Before we talk about your incredible wrestling career, your MMA career, let me ask you, I have to ask you, what did you think about the Jake Paul versus Tyron Woodley fight? Well, I thought, I mean, I was kind of biased. I thought Tyron won. I had five rounds of three. And again, maybe this is my bias in the way I was seeing it. I thought he was more effective with the striking and he was more aggressive, and Jake had more volume, but that was the only thing I would give him. And I guess a lot of people just didn't see it that way. They thought he landed more, significantly more punches. I just didn't think I really did any damage. It was a split decision? Split decision, yeah. Were you surprised? Well, it was the thing, so the thing I said when I went in to fight him, I said, maybe he's good, maybe he's not. We really have no idea to this point, you know? And so I knew Tyron was a lot better at boxing than I was. And so I thought, okay, Tyron, I think it's a good likelihood that Tyron beats him up, but there's a chance that Jake's kind of good at this. And I think that's kind of what played out is he's kind of good at it, even if you saw it the way I saw it, he still was impressive in his showing and he's obviously put a lot of time into it. So he's not bad. We'll say that much, you know? But isn't it surprising to you that like a elite level athlete, combat athlete lost to somebody who just takes it really seriously, but is nevertheless not elite level? Hmm, but I think boxing is a really specific rule set. So I'll speak about Tyron, not myself. Tyron had good striking, but obviously it was his first boxing match ever. And within mixed martial arts, you have the fear of the takedown and the fear of the kick and fear of other things to go along with the punching. And so if you look at Tyron throughout his MMA career, a lot of times what set up his punches were like level change fakes at a takedown and they dropped, boom, and then something comes over the top, right? So there's many more elements to worry about in mixed martial arts versus boxing. There's only one. It was his first fight. Yes, I thought Tyron was gonna win. I thought this was gonna happen. But like I said, I mean, it's pretty evident that Jake's, he's not bad at boxing. He's pretty solid, you know? He gets in there and works hard at it, I guess. Out of 10 times, how many times do you think Jake wins? I guess Tyron. I guess Tyron. They fight again and again and again, like iterative. Yeah, so I mean, part of the thing is, okay, so Jake's corner said you need a knockout going into the eighth round, right? So I think they thought, maybe they're trying to motivate him, but I don't see it that way because if they were actually thought that he was winning, why would they encourage him to take a dumb risk when Tyron has clearly his knockout power, right? It's a really stupid coaching philosophy if that's what you're thinking. So you obviously are thinking, hey, this is actually in the balance, it's competitive. And I feel like Tyron thought maybe he was winning and didn't have the urgency necessary. And so I think there's a chance he turns it up a lot. Matt, I would want to watch him again before I- So you want to see the second. And I have this problem with my personality. Here's my personality, Alex. I have an issue with not being able to give really exact answers. So I hate giving you an answer that like, I don't feel like is 100% calculated. So I would like to see them go once more because I would like to see, hey, can Tyron, because if Tyron can turn the pace and Jake can't handle it, then I think it's an eight, one, or nine, two, right? If it goes the exact same way, and maybe Tyron was a close split decision, I'm saying, oh, it's probably gonna be close every single time. We're probably gonna get a five to five type of thing. So it's like, I feel like out of one match, it's not totally indicative of what the future is gonna look like. I feel like Tyron would get a knockout and then you would still be in the same place. Like not knowing what to predict. Okay, so your fight with Jake Paul, looking back, you had a little bit of time now. How would you analyze that fight? Well, I mean, the fight specifically, I got cracked with an overhead right. So I mean, it kind of sucks. I would say, you know, and this is where I was like, I really don't care. And everyone's like, why would you turn to your reputation? It's like, well, I wanted to do it. I had an enjoyable time training in the buildup. Obviously I wasn't skillful enough to get the win. But even despite the fact that I know what's gonna happen, if someone asked me to do it again, I probably would have done it again, you know? And so the way I was thinking about when I was studying whether to do it or not, cause I got the offer, it's like, okay, is this money, it can change my life. Yeah, it could, right? It's not gonna double my net worth, but it's gonna add significantly and make my life easier. Number two is like when I was in high school, we used to do boxing matches for free, just cause we thought it was fun. We didn't have something going on for Friday night. Me and my buddies would get together and we had some boxing goes in basically and we punched each other in the head. So it's like, for something I think is enjoyable and not gonna pay me a whole bunch of money. Yeah, sure, I'll do it. Would you, do you think if you got the rematch, if you did the rematch, would you, what are the odds you win? Okay, let's see. Probably not very good. I think he's pretty good actually, and I'm not very good. Now it's probably at a low point for me, because, so when I started training for that, I was like 215 pounds, which is the heaviest ever been. I came off my hip surgery. I literally, like when I said, yes, like I'll do it, like I literally started working out like the week before for the first time in my, you know, instance of surgery, cause I wasn't able to do anything. So could I perform better? Yeah, but now after watching him box tiring, like if you ask me, Ben, can you beat tiring? Probably not, but I don't think I can beat tiring. So, in boxing, yeah, so my chances of beating him, you know, and watching that card, it's like, damn, like, kind of be fun to box someone who I know sucks, who I know can beat. Now that's what would be fun, you know, cause like the training, the preparation was fun, but then obviously I got my butt kicked out, so that sucked, you know, could I swear on this podcast? Yeah, of course. Okay, well I was gonna drop an F-bomb, but I wasn't quite sure. I think that sucked, is a swear. No, no, no. You could drop all of the F-bombs you want. So preparation wise, do you think you were more prepared for that fight or the Jordan Burroughs exhibition? I mean, like how did you approach it mentally, you know? Well, the Burroughs thing, I obviously, it's okay. So when I retired the first time in 2017, Burroughs was the only current, like, we'll say really elite level wrestler that I'd never trained with. I was really good friends with Nebraska's head assistant coach, still am. And I said, hey, I just want, I'm gonna pay my own way. I wanna come down and train with Jordan, cause I wanna see what it feels like. You know, I wanna get in there and mix it up. I mix it up with David Taylor and Kyle Dake. I mean, there's just something about wrestling that I love. And so I flew myself down there in January of 2018 and I spent four days training with Jordan. It was a really good time. It gave me some great insight into how he thinks and, you know, what a great champion he is. What was it like training with him? Like what, can you get some insights? Yeah, of course. Like what the, like how hard is the live training? Is it more drilling? Is it technical? Like how does his, it seems like his style is very different than yours. So how does that match up in the room in terms of like what you learn from each other, that kind of thing. We went full live for one, I think it was like 12 or 15 minute ago where it was just go wrestle. We did a bunch of simulated live, but obviously he had, so I was a senior in college and he was a freshman at Nebraska and so we, our teams had dueled each other. He was obviously a lot smaller at that point in time. But he had followed my career. And so when I went in there, it was like, hey, I know you're really good at this position. What about this position? What are you trying to do? How exactly does it work? And then let's wrestle there, you know? And then, hey, what about this position? And so, you know, we would spend 30 to 40 minutes talking about that position. On the ground or? It was like, when was it chest wrap? When was it for headlock? When was, I don't know, it's called, we call it the lightning dump. But it's a, you know. The lightning dump? Yeah, my buddy's name was Lightning Luke Smith at high school and he was the first person I saw do it. So usually when I see someone do something, then I name that move after them. Got it. I know, right? Great name. It's a good name. So, yeah, but so what I said with that is like, he was still trying to be the best in the world. I was just trying to go work out with Jordan Burles because I enjoyed wrestling. Is like someone who, at that point, when he has five world titles at that, four or five at that point, a lot. And so I used it with my high school kids. It was like, hey, this is the guy who's the best in the world who's bringing someone in and saying, well, how do I do this? How do I do that? What about this? What about that? And so the level of inquisitive, inquisitive, that's a hard word, inquisitiveness he has, is really impressive. And then it's obvious why he got to the level he did because he's figuring out all these little situations. And that's obviously one of the biggest things I think wrestlers, a lot of wrestlers fail to do as they get older, even when they get to early college age, they say, this is my style, this is what I do. I'm gonna lift and work out hard and I'm not gonna add anything to my game. Whereas you've seen many progressions in Jordan Burroughs' game and he just made his 10th world team. And if you have a really keen eye, you've been able to watch him change. I've been watching him since 2007. He's changed so much. And obviously still maintained a world-class level almost the entire time. When you say change, like what changed? Because he's got that double leg. But they're saying, he doesn't have double leg anymore. Was that? He like hit his double leg for the first time because Alex Deirdre, he ended it in years. Yeah, so that's like, when people think about Jordan Burroughs, they think about the double leg because in his early years, Fire, he had a great double leg. So in those years, I would say, the biggest thing with Jordan Burroughs' double leg wasn't his level of explosiveness, it was his level of persistence. He would shoot and shoot and shoot and shoot. And it would, a lot of times, it would be from fun, creative angles and out of scandals. Also, he's on you. And he was just super persistent with it. And I think that was probably the key. And then you saw, when he came out to one of the first World Championships in 2011, it was kind of that type of mentality. And then shortly after then, obviously everyone was starting to lower their stance, getting lower and he developed a really good like, Mantis go behind series where he would go one way or the other way. Then he started developing a really good like, low single ankle pick type thing. And then his hand fighting got really tremendous, like 15, 16, 17, his hand fighting was really good. And now I just commented at the 21 trials, like a few of the defensive sequences he got into, it's like, holy shit. Like just not from an athletic standpoint, from a technical standpoint, the things he were doing were just tremendous. So I've seen him as someone like, who's continued to reinvent themselves over the course of the last 10, 12 years. Especially in the, as a junior and senior in college, you're exceptionally dominant. If you were to face him at the peak, both of your peaks of NCAA wrestling, could you beat him? And if you can beat him, of course you can beat him. Yeah. How do you solve the Jordan Borrell's problem? Well, so for a folk style wrestling standpoint. Folk style, yes. Folk style, so, you know, he had some competitive matches at junior and senior year. He had a two one win over, or maybe it's three two, over Michael Chandler, who was my teammate, who's fighting, you'll see now. He had a two one win over Tyler Caldwell. So I think you can glean some insight into that. You know, he got rid, he got so mad about this up on a podcast. So during Corona, we had to make up all kinds of bullshit to talk about. Yeah. And we were doing like the last 10 years, best 165s. And I said, Kyle Dake would ride him for over a minute. Oh wow. He got so mad, you want to come on the podcast the next day. So hopefully he doesn't listen to this. Like, fuck you, man. You know, but you know. When was this? This is during Corona. Corona last year. He got mad at, we were talking about, we were- Before the trials. Yeah, correct, yeah. So, you know, Michael Chandler wrote him for two minutes plus and that was his junior year, not a senior year. Sure, right. But it's close. So I think there's some things there. I think the interesting thing would be, if I would have stuck around, right? So I chose to go into mixed martial arts after 2008, I would have been 74 and he would have been 74. So we would have had to wrestle. And then I think that the freestyle Jordan Burroughs puzzle is a lot more difficult to solve than the folk style Jordan Burroughs puzzle. And I think, I don't think he would, I think he would acknowledge that he's much better at freestyle than he was at folk style. Although he was very good, he's better. This is like raw speed explosiveness, presents a problem to you. Well, so he was never, I mean, he didn't really excel on the mat in kind of either style. In freestyle, he has got some good lace transitions, but in folk style, like his whole, like in his entire college career, I think he has like 10 pins, which is almost nothing, you know, so he was gaining no value off the top position. He was good enough on most people to get off bottom without it being an issue, but it wasn't like, oh my gosh, this is an area where we really have to be careful, there's a lot of things here. You know, it's just, he wasn't gaining value there. Whereas in freestyle, he, I don't want to say never, but the amount of times he gets turned is incredibly rare, very, very rare. And he does have a lace transition, so he gets a lot of points there. So, and obviously freestyle is, it can be geared way more in the neutral position, right? Where we're only doing takedowns. So, yeah. Were you surprised that he lost to Dake in the trials, to Kyle Dake? Oh, Kyle's so, so he's so good, right? I mean, I think his performance in the Olympics was, well, his loss then was shocking too. I mean, we never see that happen to Kyle Dake. You know, he's been a guy who's competed with Jordan Burroughs forever, and obviously he was on the losing side for a while, and now he's on the winning side. But I think a lot of people thought it was a coin flip, and I think actually Kyle Dake made it feel like it's not a coin flip. Now, to me it feels like Kyle Dake is gonna win that match significantly more times than he isn't, is what it feels like. Yeah, I forgot which trials it was. Was it four years ago? Or Kyle Dake threw him, like he, he, you saw inklings of like, oh wow, there might be eventually a changing of the guard. Yeah, so 13, Kyle came out, and he had the one throw, but then he lost one of the matches decisively, and then he was hurt in 14, and in 16, Kyle Dake actually went up to 86 kilograms. So in actually in 16, at the trials we had, so Jake Herbert was the number one seed. He was former, as Guy Russell, I was a former world silver medalist. So you had David Taylor, who had not made a team yet, who is now a world champion, Olympic champion. You had Kyle Dake in the bracket, who was a two-time world champion now, and you had Jayden Cox in the bracket, who had not made any teams yet, but is now what, a four-time world medalist, two-time world champion. So, and then obviously Jayden came out on top of that, won his first Olympic medal, Olympic bronze medal. So Kyle didn't wrestle Jordan in 16, and Jordan, Kyle's contention the whole time, and they argued about this. So I actually did a little bit of backstabbing. Well, it was not, it's not backstabbing. And both of them were just one of them. I didn't tell any of them. Okay, so Jordan got mad. We talked about this fake match for Encrona, right? Yeah. We had to make up something to talk about. Yeah, of course. It says obviously no matches. So we talked about this fake match, and- Do you stand behind that statement, by the way? Listen, here's what I said. Kyle Dake's four-time NCAA champion. Yes, I said, you gotta pick a winner. I said, Kyle Dake wins 2-1 on a minute and six ride time, which I mean, is literally, we're talking as close as it gets, as close as it gets for Kyle Dake, who's a four-time NCAA champion. I'm sorry, we're talking- Over Jordan Burroughs. Over Jordan Burroughs. Yes, in a folks' down match. In a folks' down match. Hypothetical. Completely hypothetical. Now or in college? In college. Both of them at their peaks at 165 pounds. So completely hypothetical. And so Jordan called in, he was all pissed at me for picking Kyle Dake. He wants to come on the next day and argue his point. So I said, that's dumb. We had to pick a winner, we had to do something hypothetical. So I called Kyle Dake and I said, Kyle, Jordan's gonna come on and argue his case in the morning. If he's gonna do that, why don't you come in and argue your case? So no one else knew Kyle was coming on the podcast. So they both show up and they went at it. But one of the contentions Kyle had for years, and there's still this rule, if you win a world level medal, the following year, you sit out until the very end of the American trials. And they do a best two or three. So every time previously that Kyle had wrestled Jordan, he had to come through a tournament on Saturday. Okay, probably three matches. And then on Sunday, he would wrestle Jordan and invest two out of three. So his contention was, I'm only wrestling Jordan at a disadvantage because I have to compete on Saturday and then competing on, which it's a fair argument, it really is. But I also see USA Wrestling's point is like, if someone wins a world medal, we're gonna reward them because we want that person on the team again. It's crazy though that you're like Kyle Dake had to wrestle because he's not wrestling bums in that division. Yeah, and yeah, I don't know. I don't know how wrestlers do it because you have to go to war like three matches and then face Jordan Burroughs. Yeah, especially a few of those years with Dake had, the name Andrew Howell, but those were really competitive matches. David Taylor had really competitive match with him. Isaiah Martinez even got in there, Deeringer. So he had some really competitive matches before he ever got to Jordan Burroughs. So I never answered your initial question was, how did I feel? So the Jordan Burroughs match, I was not in wrestling shape at all. Meaning wrestling's heavily, especially neutral positions, heavily dependent on timing and other things. I was wrestling very, very minimally because I started fighting again. So like my athletic shape was great, but it was mainly for fighting. I wasn't wrestling. So I think they were actually trying to do Burroughs, Dake at the beat the streets. It's the biggest fundraiser in wrestling every single year. In New York. In New York City. They usually raised like a million dollars. They started all these programs in New York City which I really wonder what they're doing with the money now because they probably can't get heavy kids wrestling because New York's crazy. Anyway. I think New York figures out a way what to do with the money. Hence Michael Malz complaining that they're corrupt and all that stuff. But it goes to the beat the streets organization. Oh it does. Who then starts the clubs in New York. So I don't know what to do with my. Anyway, so I was called like, I don't know, two weeks before the event and said, hey, someone was supposed to wrestle Jordan Burroughs. It fell out. Would you wrestle him? I said, yeah, sure, why not? But it's like, well, I said, I trained with them for four days the year before. I had a pretty good idea how the match was gonna go. Wasn't gonna go so well for me. But it's like, okay, you're missing a main event. I can bring, because of where I'm at right now in my life, I can bring a lot of attention to wrestling. I can help you guys raise a bunch of money from beat the streets. My goal is, I think I thought I could get one takedown or turn on him was kind of my goal for the match. I didn't get there. You weren't kind of hard. He went hard. Yeah, asshole. Give me a point. I said, this is bullshit, Jordan. I told him during the match, like this is bullshit. You're fucking going too hard right now. I'm not a wrestler. I'm not a wrestler anymore. I'm a fighter. I'm coming in here. So, yeah, so I had a really good idea. I mean, we wrestled together. I think in the hit and hit, I'll probably get mad because I think in the live go, we did like the 12 or 15 minutes, I think I actually scored a takedown in that, I believe maybe, or maybe it was a turn. He'll probably say no, I didn't, but whatever. Yeah, so I knew what was gonna happen. I knew what the outcome was gonna be. I knew I could probably, I was hoping I could stay competitive and maybe lose like 10-2 or something. Yeah. Well, let's walk back because I think I originally brought it up in terms of how prepared were you against Jake Paul versus Jordan Barrows. So did you prepare for Jake, cardio wise? Yeah, I worked hard. Yeah, I did, but it was, I told you, I started training for my, I mean, once I had my hip surgery, they said, for the first six weeks, you can't even walk. And it was hard for me to listen to them because by week four, four and a half, five, I was feeling pretty good, I wanted to get to my crutches, but I'm like, you know what, this is for the rest of my life. And if you get the, so if you get the real hip replacement, there's no wrestling, there's no nothing, right? So that's the next step. So, okay, I'm gonna take this serious. So I do my crutches for the six weeks. The next six weeks, it's still like really low weight bearing, can't mess, do anything, you know? So then I get done with the three months, which is like January and I'm like, okay, I should start working out. So I started riding bike a little bit and then, okay, now I'm fucking fat, I'm gonna get in better shape because I haven't been able to do anything. So I'm actually start working out and then that happened. So I'm like, okay, well now I got three months and it gives me a good reason to get back in shape. I knew I wasn't gonna be a full-time boxer, so it's like, how do I put a boxing camp together? So I found, I had my old teammate Mike Rhodes, he came up and kind of lived with me-ish kind of thing for three months. I found a couple of his guy K9 out of Michigan. He came over three weeks, he was great. I went to Freddie Roach for a week. So I kind of like, you know, tried to get as many good ideas as I could. And my thought was like, okay, well, if this dude sucks, I can just be tough and block a few punches, get him tired and then beat him up. If he's good, there's probably not much I'm gonna do about in the next three months because I was never good at boxing in the first place. All of my stand-up in mixed martial arts was predicated on how do I get through the two or three punches that are gonna come at me in the time I need to get ahold of them? You know, you only have to make two or three of them miss and then boom, you're on top of them, at least for me. That was all my striking was predicated on. It wasn't about, hey, I'm gonna do damage on the feet in order to make something else happen. It was like, how do I clear this barrier, get ahold of you? And if you, I actually did the math one time. I think I gotta take down, if you include the knockout round, I guess, miles of it all. I gotta take down in every round except two. So it was like 53 out of 55 rounds in MMA I gotta take down somewhere in there. Okay, so you're hunting the takedown once you get your hands on them, you get the takedown. Okay, but the incredible thing about you, I just recently talked, spent a couple of days with Jimmy Pedro and he talked about his guys and just champions in general hating to lose more than they love winning. And the way you talked about losing, you lost very few times in your career, like later, you were dominating both the wrestling and MMA, but the way you took these losses against people that are, I don't know, below elite level. It's fair. I was gonna get pissy, but- It's completely fair. I thought he was a bum too. No, that's not what I meant. I'm in trouble. It's okay, no, it's good. No, no, no, no, but like, what can you explain the psychology behind that? Like the, what, is there a system behind this? Is there a philosophy behind this? Well, I wasn't very good in the beginning. I think that's where I'll start. So I didn't start getting good until the age of like 13. I started at five. I probably started competing more at age 10, 11. Didn't really get good until 13. It's still at 13. It's not gonna be great. I'm getting better, right? I'm pretty good. So actually, I have, I have read this book on sports psych, but this, it's, I got, well, I got someone write it for me kind of thing, because I've had this philosophy for years, that there has to be this balance between two things, right? So on the one hand, in this category, on the one hand you have hating to lose. A great champion has to hate to lose, like you said, right? But on this other hand, you have to have someone who seeks out challenges, right? Because if you don't have that, you're never gonna reach your full potential either. And so you have to balance these two balls at the same time, right? And so like for me, I always, and this is maybe because that wasn't good, but I was always like, let me go find the best people to wrestle all the time. Let me go find, I would like literally, like seven days grade when I was starting to get better. It was like, and there's an internet, well, there's no one was using the internet. It was like a wrestling magazine. But hey dad, there's a tournament here. I think that, are the kids gonna be there? Can you take me two hours across the state today, please? You would wrestle like in competition against them. In competition, yeah, yeah, in competition. Hey, I heard there's this tournament. Here's the magazine, this is this tournament. Hey dad, will you take me over there tomorrow? You weren't trying to win. You were trying to get the experience. I was trying to wrestle the best guys. Maybe I win, maybe I lose. There's no, when you do a competition, there's no guarantee of a win or a loss. You're just doing competition, right? So I wanted to go, I wanted to challenge myself against the best guys. Of which I thought maybe I could come on top, right? So like eighth grade year, I won way, I probably only lost a handful of times in the state. The state of Wisconsin is probably really, really minimal the amount of times I lost, you know? But it was just about getting the challenge. And it's like some kids, and not kids in my club, because I'll push them very hard on this, are scared of challenging themselves. They like being the big fish in this small pond. They're not willing to go say, I wanna go get that guy, and I wanna get that guy, and I wanna get that guy. And so that's like, so I think that's part of it for me, is like, I always just love the challenge. I enjoy competing thoroughly, right? And I understood from a young age, because it wasn't even good. Losing's a part of it. You're not always gonna win. And that was kind of it. It's like, hey, sometimes, you know, and for my MMA career, I never planned it to go that way, but yeah, I didn't lose for nine years. And like, that's pretty rare. I didn't plan for that to happen. That was just what happened, you know? Okay, but you also didn't lose like the second part of your college career. My 87, I won my last 87 matches, yeah. Yeah. So that didn't come along with the hatred of losing? You just- I don't like losing. I still don't like it. Yeah. Yeah, I would've much better. But you seem to, okay, but you don't, you don't seem, you seem to kind of shrug it off a little bit. Okay, so like, specifically with these two instances that you bring up. With the MOSFETTALL, it feels definitely so, okay. All right, let's- Let's go deep, let's go deep. So the MOSFETTALL one, it feels different, because I had- So whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, let's, for people who don't know, MOSFETTALL loss was your first loss. First loss. In MMA. Yes. Yeah. Yeah, and I mean, it was a dramatic loss. Very dramatic. And there was this kind of buildup as you were potentially one of the greats of all time coming into this fight. And so, this pressure, all of that. So the, no, I mean, I was thoroughly enjoying it. I didn't feel the pressure. So the MOSFETTALL fight is, I think that he got one fucking move on me. It's not like he beat me. And if we do that again, I think I win. At that point in my life, for sure, I think I win way, way, way more times than I lose. He knew that too, that's why he didn't want, he didn't want to sound the about agreement. That's why I had to taunt him and why he got so mad, because I had to continue to taunt him in order to get him to sign, right? So that one hurt because, as for people who don't know, my memory trails go through fast. I did three fights in like smaller leagues. I got signed by Bellator. I was undefeated for three and a half years. I was nine and oh. When I got done with that in 2012, 2013, at that point in my head, I was just gonna transition to the UFC, because that's where you go. I was ranked like six in the world. I hadn't really had a competitive match at the end of the Bellator thing. And Dana White, for a reason, still unknown to me. We still haven't had this conversation. I wish I could ask, I should ask him sometime. Chose to refuse me any entry into UFC. He just said, I went to his office, and he literally said, we're not interested. We're not gonna make you an offer. Did you mention something to, about him, about the UFC? That was a year before that. That was a year before. That might play a role in it, I think. So yes, what happened the year before that was, I called him a liar, but listen, I'm right on this one, because he said, you can't test for drugs, because I'm all natural, which you could help by my physique. And I was always put off by the fact that so many people cheated. And I was very vocal about that. And so he had made some statement like, oh, there's no way you can test. I said, bullshit, you, very specifically, I said, Youssada does it for all other sports worldwide. You can do it. And then it was funny, because I hired Youssada a couple of years later. So I think he took some offense to that. But that was like a year and almost a year and a half, I think, somewhere later. It's not like he holds a grudge or anything. Yeah. So I literally go to Vegas. It's a long story, you can read about it other places. So I got released from a belt. It's not like this is a negotiation. I got released from my belt or contract. I said, I'm out of here. I'm going to the UFC. I go to Vegas and then I was told, hey, there's no offer for you. Tough shit. So then I ended up signing with one championship. I spent what, three and a half years there, I won the belt in my second fight and retain the title the entire time. And then I just- I get dominating people. Yeah, I didn't have a competitive fight. And so I retired 18 and 0. Never, never again, and for someone who loves a challenge, never getting to really challenge myself was incredibly frustrating. And I left the door open. I said, if I ever get the chance to prove I'm in this world, I'd love to come back. So somehow a year later, I get traded. Trades have never happened. This is the one and only trade ever. I've been retired for a year. I got traded. I get to come back. I fight Robbie Lauer the first fight. I win. And then essentially they're saying, okay, if you fight, if you beat George, you're going to get the title of shit against Marty. And it's like, this is what I've been working for the entire- I've been trying to prove I was the best part of the world for the last 10 years and I have not been afforded this opportunity. So when I lost to George, that was hard because it was something that I had waited for for a really, really long time. It was something that I thought I could compete for and I never got the opportunity to do. So that one was hard. At the same time, from just a competitive logistic, it's like, he got me with one move. It wasn't like he beat my ass for 15 minutes and I got beat a bunch of different ways. So that was like, fuck, if I get it again, I could have done it, but they're not going to let me have it again. It's not like wrestling where you could go the next year or the next week or whatever. You lose a big 10, you go to nationals two weeks later. Does that loss change you in any way, your psychology? I don't think so. It's the first loss. I mean, had I had a longer MMA career post that, there definitely would have been a lot of time spent getting better at the entry point to the takedown, right? Which I'd already spent time there. I hate making excuses, but yeah, the hip, the hinging of my hip, what I couldn't do, was preventing me from doing some things and it's why if you look at the fight, I'm bent over as I go for the double leg. Yeah, so- So what happened for people who don't know, you went in for a double leg and he won- He did a flying knee and it- And the way- He caught you well. Specifically the way he did that knee was kind of different than the way anyone had thrown flying knees before. Most people go more just from a stand straight vertical, whereas he took a few running steps and went more, the trajectory of the angle was different. So I think that's kind of probably why it caught, I think a lot of things in combat, well probably everything, but I focus specifically on combat, have been subconsciously, like our brain is reading what's coming at us and lost time to the stuff we've seen before so we can judge how to move correctly. He misread because it's something you haven't seen before. Had not seen him come at that specific angle, yeah. So that loss was really hard. What the Burroughs wanted, I told you, I knew I was gonna lose. So it was like, whatever, you know, I'm taking this because I want to put the sport of wrestling out there in a big way, and I want to help them raise a lot of money. We sold at Madison Square Garden, Hulu Theater, and we raised a whole bunch of money. So my goals were accomplished. Jake Paul fight, I took it because they paid me a whole bunch of money, and I thought it was gonna be fun. Did I have any illusion? I was a great boxer, no illusions whatsoever. Would I have preferred to win? Absolutely, but you know, like I told everyone, whether I win or lose on Saturday night, I'm gonna be back coaching wrestling on Monday because that's what I enjoy doing, and I was back coaching wrestling on Monday. And once in a while, these middle school kids give me a little bit of shit about it. That's it. So I was like, where were you in terms of your shape and how you felt in the Muzzardall fight? Would you say you're on the, I mean, it's a difficult question to ask of a world-class athlete, but like, were you past the peak? Oh yeah, yeah. And so I don't know why guys like to lie about that. I mean, the peak for me was really evidently in my late 20s, and maybe they are all fueled by extra supplements, I don't know. But for me, that was evident. But you get this, so you get this crosshair where if you're smart, like I mentioned, John Brows was, you're still gaining wisdom, you're gaining strategy, you're gaining a lot of things, right? And so while your physicality may go down, your overall skill level still may be rising, especially in MMA because people usually start later because they're gaining wisdom, strategy, all of the, maybe more tools in the toolbox, right? They're getting all these things. So their actual competitive peak, despite their athletic peak going down, might still be a few years past that, right? Because these things are crossing. No, so I felt, I felt, I was great. Obviously the hip was an issue. It's funny because so that I knew I had a lot of pain here, and I knew it was because of this. And it was like, okay, whenever I'm done, I'll just get it taken care of, whatever. But every time I train, I'll have pain kind of like all up my back. And the day after the surgery, I woke up and there was no pain on the right side of my, the surgery was on the left side. There's no pain on the right side of my back. I'm like, that's fucking weird. Like every morning I wake up, there's a lot of pain there, you know? I'm like, okay, well, I'm on pain pills. Maybe it'll come back tomorrow. And that's clearly never, never been back since my onset. So it was weird because it was like this, I thought this was affecting this, but it was affecting all the way across my whole back. So, you know, if I get to get a new hip, honestly, if I, if I, I don't know if this is gonna change the competitive outcome whatsoever. If I had known how good the hip replacement was gonna be, I would have done it the second I retired from one championship in November of 2017, I would have had my hip surgery scheduled for December one. Just from a lifestyle standpoint, I could only sleep in one position. There was a lot of things I couldn't do. I was in a lot of pain. So I would have done that a lot earlier. But no, from an athletic point, I was ready. This shit goes wrong sometimes. I don't know how to ask this, but you know, Joe Rogan, me, I had a sense about you similar to like a Fedor that you are potentially one of the greatest ever. Yeah. Does it hurt that you're not in the discussion now of being in the top 10 of all time? I didn't prove it. I don't deserve it. You had a, I mean. But I didn't, I didn't prove it. I mean, and so it's like, had I somehow gotten to convince Dana White, we go and convince him in 2013 to make me an offer. And I didn't even need a good offer. I needed any offer. Had I gotten the offer then, maybe the outcome's different, right? But given, I would never expect anyone to think of me that way. I didn't prove it. I know what I was, and I'm good with that. And yeah, other people never got to see that. Do you think, well, you don't know, you can't know fully, right? Do you think if you went to the UFC at that time instead of one championship. I think it would have a lot of success. Yeah, I mean, there's obviously certain guys, there's a lot of guys I've trained with that I had a lot of really good results against. And obviously- Who was the Walter Waite at that- Tyrone was a champion for a long time there. So I was around, Tyrone was a champion, Anthony was a champion at Lightweight. I was, you know, same gym as him. And we had a lot of people coming through. Yeah, I- Would you face Tyrone? Would I have fought him? I don't think so. I mean, so he was still the champion when I came into the UFC. And we said, no, we're not gonna fight. All right. Hey, so he can't change history, right? So once something happens, you gotta accept for what it is and move forward. And obviously hope you can continue to keep accomplishing great things, which for me, obviously my athletic career is over. So now it's gonna be through my wrestling academies and, you know, who knows what else I get into. You might do exhibition matches and all that kind of stuff, right? Since who? Wrestling and stuff, no? I don't think so. So here's my thing with the wrestling matches is like, just for fun, if you said, hey Ben, just for fun. Yeah. Would you love to go wrestle someone? Yeah, I would, I would, right? I love wrestling. I get in there. I love, you know, I love like, so one of my guys has gotten to be pretty good. He's in college, key guy in Keegan O'Toole. He just won a junior world title this year. And so when I'm doing private lessons, I have such to think about the development of the athletes. Sometimes I can wrestle hard, but most of the time it's like, I'm just gonna help them with whatever they need help with. And it's still wrestling and it's fun, but it's helping them. You know, for like, for Keegan goes back this summer and he's training for the junior world title. So to be able to just shake hands sometimes and say like, how am I trying to kick your ass? She tried to kick my ass, you know, like just to go. Like, it's so much fun. And I don't get to do that very much. So if you said, Ben, would you love to do some matches? And the answer is yeah. The problem, unfortunately for me, and maybe you can talk me off the ledge here, is like, because of where I've gotten to in my career, if I choose to do wrestling matches, it's gonna, people are gonna be really excited about it. It's gonna pull up. It's like, I just wanna wrestle just to wrestle. I'd rather just like go in a room where no one can watch and just wrestle and just enjoy it. Well, you could also wrestle. So there's different kinds of wrestling. There's wrestling where there's an event and like, you know, there's a buildup and an announcement. And you can also do like Khabib style, like in the room, there's cameras and you're kind of going. It's like the way- Like Khabib does that? No, in- Marcelo did that. He woke my ass a few times. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I've seen Khabib with some videos. It's not like set up. It's just people going hard and then it's more fun. Yeah. And it's also more like presenting the beauty of the sport. Yeah, for sure. And like, and there's no winning or losing really in that context. Like you're just, you're always joking around a little bit, even when you're going super hard. So I feel like, especially in the modern day with the internet, that's a compelling way to do. So I've thought about, this is the one thing I've thought about doing, because I told you about my buddy, it was the content thing, it's called Rockfin. I thought about doing, you know, the old really famous Gracie challenge. Yeah. Okay, so I thought about doing the Ask Me Challenge. You wanna hear my rule set? Yeah, let's go. I'm not sure I'm gonna do this. People are gonna show up to you, like in Wisconsin. I have to select you. I'll start with a thousand bucks, right? Okay, 30 minutes. You pin me or I pin you. That's it. No points, no nothing. We just wrestle. Camera, that's it, right? Camera in the room, maybe. Maybe there's a referee, because we don't want there to be a contention over the pin. So. Just one pin. Just one pin. 30 minutes, 30 minutes, okay? If I pin you, you don't get shit, you go home, right? Every person I pin, it goes up by a thousand dollars, two thousand, three thousand, four thousand, five thousand, and so on. If you make it the distance, and I don't pin you and you don't pin me, I'll pay for your travel and give you 500 bucks, right? This is the kind of consolation prize for showing up. If you pin me, you get whatever the jackpot is. Wait, who's adding to the jackpot? I am, it's my money. But then, what's the incentive to keep winning for you? Because it's jackpot. Well, because I would put the content somewhere and people would watch it, right? Oh, so you're gonna make money. Yeah, so you'd make money that way. But it's not exponentially growing, right? It's just going up by like. Yeah, I really think there's probably only a couple people that could pin me. So, I would either just not choose those people or wait till I get a really large audience and people get really excited, and in that case, I'm making a lot of money, so. What do you think, how many matches would go with you? Like, Kaldik shows up. I don't think he can pin me. Yeah. I mean like, so Jordan Broz could beat me, but he can't pin me. He was never a pinner. Yeah. He ain't gonna pin me. There's only a few people who have the skill level to do so, right? It takes a lot. So, pinning was one of my specialties. I had the fourth most of all time and I won the pinning award the last two years. So, and then even. So, you think you can be down on points and just pin them. This is actually one of the issues I have with Jiu-Jitsu and the point system and the Eddie Bravo thing. I actually think Eddie Bravo things kind of, people get so mad at me, sorry, Jiu-Jitsu. I think it's bullshit. And you want me to tell you why it's bullshit? Yeah. So like, if Jordan Broz whiffs my ass and the score is 16 to two, but he can't pin me, then I get to go to overtime and get a cradle on him. I'm probably gonna pin him. So, I'm better than Jordan Broz. Nah, that ain't right. He just whupped my ass. Do you know what I'm saying? Like, if we can go the whole, because they do submission only. So, if Jordan Broz beats me up for, what is it, eight minutes, 10 minutes? I don't know, what's the length of an Eddie Bravo match? Yeah, I don't know. That's something like that, yeah, yeah. So, we go 10, me and Jordan Broz go 10 minutes. He's gonna outscore me significantly. He will not pin me, I promise you that, okay? So now, we go to the overtime. Strong words, but yeah. He won't, Jordan Broz is not gonna, he's gonna beat me. I will give you that. Carl Dake won't pin you either. No. Okay. Okay, they will both beat me on points very badly. Now, David Taylor, he might pin me because he's a very good pinner also. They'll beat me very badly, they will not pin me. But now, we get to overtime and we get to pick like, right, so in Eddie Bravo, you get a rear naked choke or an arm bar. Okay, give me a cradle, I'll probably pin him, okay? A good cradle. If you can say cradle or maybe give them, they're probably not gonna pin me, right? Maybe there's a chance, but probably not because this is not their specialty. So, for people who don't know, the Eddie Bravo thing is when it goes into overtime, you get a dominant position on a person and you get to, yeah, basically put them in a cradle. This is the wrestling equivalent. But you take their back. Maybe an arm bar, yeah, a wrestling arm bar. So, and I don't think that's very fair because if someone whips your ass, they whoop your ass and then, you know, and so I think the reason why you do to people accept that rule set is that I don't think, I think they know this, but would admit it, I don't think their points scoring system adequately rewards what people value. So, like in wrestling, we value takedowns because it gets closer to the pin and the most valuable scoring is a near fault, near to the pin because that's the ultimate goal to sport whereas in Jiu-Jitsu, for example, like if I were to get a takedown, so like if I went to Gordon Ryan and he just didn't pull guard, I would probably get the takedown. Now, if somehow he didn't submit me, which he probably would, right? But say he got close to like 12 submissions, but somehow I slipped out of all of them. Now I went to Z-Bro, like that's ridiculous. Like he should very clearly win because he almost submitted, you know what I'm saying? Like, and I realized the difficulty. I realized the difficulty in rewarding near submissions, but that is the most valuable thing is getting close to finishing the match and in most competitions, they don't actually reward that. But okay, so this isn't about the sport. This is about the Ben Askren challenge that we're talking about. Okay, why 30 minutes? Why not unlimited time? Why go until whenever? Because then it's just a cardio thing because at some point, then someone would just have to fall over dead, right? There's no more skill level involved. It's just who can stand up the longest. You honestly don't think 30 minutes is a cardio thing too. How do you think that's actually gonna look? Kyle Dade going against you for 30 minutes. So it's gonna be kind of boring for the most part. What position are you going to be stuck in? Well, you can't have a gigantic amount of action for 30 minutes. So I relate it because some of my kids when I'm teaching them wrestling, they're like, well, but I can't do that for seven minutes. And I'm like, well, like say if I had you do hang cleans at a relatively heavy weight as hard as you could, you're not gonna last seven minutes. Your pace will slow down, right? So my thing is like, well, your pace doesn't have to step here because in wrestling you're competing as someone. So if you're here at 100 and you go to 80, but they go to 70, that's great. And then you go to 60, but they go to 40, this is even better, right? Because the gap is growing. So we don't necessarily, if we get tired, that's fine. If they get more tired, that's better. So I think most people would know that. So they would kind of slow it down. But yeah, I think it's 30, I mean, I've wrestled 30 minute goes, I've wrestled, I've wrestled hour long goes. You're not gonna get so tired, you're gonna fall over in that time period. But at some point, if it's unlimited, someone will get so tired or dehydrated that they're just gonna freaking fall over. Yeah, but you think, what about making it exciting and dynamic? You think the other person is always going to be going for the pin and thereby make it dynamic. Well, if they're working that hard, then they might exhaust themselves, right? And obviously then if you're being that dynamic, then you're adding risk to yourself too, because you are doing that. Well, I love this, this is a great idea. Well, I figured I'd rack up like 20 pins against bums, or not as great people in the beginning, and then I would start bringing in better people, because they would be enticed by $20,000, the possibility to win. Not much fanfare, just a camera and just a local. That's it, in my wrestling room. Yeah, yeah, yeah, like the Gracie Challenge. Yes, yeah. And so then maybe you have like, for most people, you have someone edit like the 90 seconds of the most fun things that happen, and then you can watch the entire 30 minutes if you want to. I mean, I think most people, if they're not really, really elite, I'm probably gonna pin them. If they're not really elite. So, yeah, but I don't know. That's something I've been thinking about, this has been like fun for me to think about. Obviously, it plays in my skill sets, because my cardio is good, and my pinning is good also. So, yeah. So, like you said, you weren't very good in your early days until 13, 14. What was the switch? You started to dominate people, in your college career you dominated. And obviously, you stopped losing at some point. Yeah. So, well, I would say, even when I didn't lose in collegiate competition, I would go in the summers and try to make the world team. So, I would lose some, not a lot, right, minimally. Okay, so when I'm five, I start playing all sports. Like, I know you moved to America at what age? 13. Okay, so five, so at least I don't know what it was for you, but in America at my age, you usually played like a sport every season, right? So, that's what I did in the beginning. I had minimal success in wrestling, I was kind of chunky. And then, I'm fifth grade, I don't, and I can't tell you, I wanted to be better. And I told my parents, and this is funny, because now I look at other 11 year olds and very few of them are this mature. And I actually think emotional maturity is kind of one of the key indicators of how long term successful someone's gonna be. And at age 11, I said, I don't wanna play baseball. I like baseball, but I don't wanna play baseball because I wanna wrestle more because I wanna get better at wrestling. So, at age 11, I quit baseball, so I could wrestle in a club for March, April, and May, because that was all that existed at that point in time. You couldn't wrestle in June, July, or any of those other months. What was that desire to get better? What is it? So, it's not about winning. I don't know where it came from. I just wanna get better. I wanna be good at this. I wanna be really good at this. So, when you're looking at kids now as a coach, you're looking for that. Somebody says, you know what, I kinda suck, I wanna get better. And I wanna try to also inspire that. I mean, honestly, I think as a coach, that's probably my biggest job is to get a kid and get them to believe I can do this. Because if I can do this, well, can I? I can do that. I can do that too, right? And there's so many kids who unfortunately have shitty parents or bad teachers that tell them, you suck, you can't be anything, right? So, I think my biggest goal as a coach is to get someone to believe they can do it. So, actually, some of the ones that believe they can do it, they're the most fun, but they're not the ones who need it the most, right? The ones who think they can are the ones that need me the most. So, they need someone to, let's go. So, I don't know what inspired me, I'm not sure. So, age 11, fifth grade, I quit. So, then I started having more success, you know, where I'm like say placing at the state tournament. In high school. So, you're right. Fifth grade, I placed at like the state, the local U State tournament, you know? So, I'm like having more success. Seventh grade was the first year I won the U State tournament. So, I'm getting better. Eighth grade, I actually feel like I got pretty good, but like when I went to the national tournament, so I was still having really minimal success. My freshman year, I decided to quit football. Same reason, it's like, well, I need to put more time into this. My parents, we got, my dad luckily got a mat in my basement. So, you know, there's no, so we have a year round club and our impetus was that we didn't have this opportunity to go to a club year round. So, we have a mat in my basement. I had to go find, hey, you wanna come wrestle? Like really, yeah, to find partners for myself. What'd you do? Did you drill? Did you live wrestle? What'd you do in that basement? So, actually, I think you'll enjoy this. I think the start of my scrambling was kind of based around that. So, I got kind of, I think it's probably my freshman, sophomore, I'm kind of, the years are a little fuzzy, right, it's been a while. But probably my freshman, sophomore, junior year, I found two kids who were really consistent, who would come out, like you would come out on, he would come out on Tuesday and this dude would come out on a Wednesday, right? And they would come every week and they were really consistent partners for me to have in the summer. But they weren't nearly as good as me. They were way worse. So, it's like, okay, how do I make this kind of like fun and compelling for them to come back? So, if I just whooped their ass, they're not gonna come back. So, it was like, I would let them get as close as I thought they could do a takedown before not getting it and then try to like escape or get out. So, obviously, if I let them get really close, sometimes they get it, you know, so they're enjoying it. I don't know if they ever knew I was doing this, right? I have no idea. And that was kind of like the start because I had to figure my way out of bad positions because I had to try to make it entertaining for them where they still got something out of it and they wanted to come back the next week. And I also got something out of it. Yeah, I love this. Because that relationship is so important with that. Like, I've had a few drilling partners, training partners that were really important to my life. And I always wonder why it's difficult, why it's so difficult to find them. Like, if anyone's listening to this, I'm looking for a judo person in the Austin area, actually. Getting the reps with people is hard, even in Jiu-Jitsu, it's just like people wanna do the fun stuff. They don't wanna really put in the work and it takes a certain kind of personality. And then you also have to make it fun for the other person, just like you said, if there's a skill mismatch, but also if you have an interest mismatch in terms of the amount of drilling you want to do, all that kind of stuff, you have to figure out ways to make it fun. It's tricky. So you did. So yeah, I think I did that. And no one told me. As I get frustrated, because now we have, just in my academy, we probably have 50, 60 high school kids only that are year round. Maybe they're not as consistent in the summer or whatever, but they're there. So when they don't have a great partner, they start whining and it's like, you little bitches. Some days they get really mad about it, because it's like, I had no partners. I had to find freaking two partners come twice a week. You guys, there's still 22 people in the room. I'm sorry there's not the perfect partner for you, but like go work out with that dude. Yeah. You know? And get him, yeah. So what was the switch that changed? Or was it gradual or? Gradual. Gradual, okay. Yeah, so I was doing so ninth grade I quit football, cause I want to get really serious. What position football you? I was actually a nose tackle. But that point, so I was also the other thing I kind of left out here, I was really fat growing up. Yeah. In sixth grade, I also decided, okay, I'm really fat. And if I want to be competitive wrestling, it shouldn't be fat, cause weight matters. I went from 130 pounds to 100 pounds in sixth grade. So by the time I was a freshman, I was 119. So I still wasn't as heavy as I was in sixth grade. So I was pretty small too, but I was also slow unfortunately. So they put me in a nose tackle. I like the competitiveness, so I was decent at it. So that's where you wrestle 119? My freshman year, yeah. Mm-hmm. So yeah, so then I still, I started having a lot of success statewide, but not nationally. It's my national success didn't come to like my junior year in high school. But yeah, I was like grinding, getting better the whole time. And then senior year, I started having a lot of success nationally and I got recruited. But then even when my freshman year of college, this is where I love competing, I would go every weekend. Cause I knew, if you take the emotions out of competition, all it is is seeing your failures, acknowledging them, and then figuring out what you need to work on, right? If we take all the emotion out of it, that's what it is. So I wrestled 50 matches as a redshirt freshman, which is incredibly rare. I had 10 losses. So it's not like, and like to not so great guys, you know? So like my skill level still at that point was not that great. And then the next year I came out and I made an NCAA finals. So I made a gigantic jump in that redshirt year to the real freshman year. So a few questions. Where did the funk style of wrestling, the creative style get developed? At which stage? So I think like looking retroactively, there was no intention to start when I was in high school with those kids, but I think that's kind of like what was happening, right? So what I would really say is I had one influential coach, redshirt year of college named Mike Ironman, great guy. But then the second thing was it was just out of necessity. I had this burning desire to be the best. And when I was getting my ass kicked every day in the room, cause we had, you know, the tireman was there. We had all American 157, we had all American 184. So I wasn't having a ton of success. And very quickly I realized from like a more traditional athletic perspective, strength and speed, I couldn't keep up with anyone. I was way worse. So it's like, okay, fuck, how do I do this? You know, I want to do this. How do I do this? There's gotta be a way, you know? So Mike Ironman showed me a couple of things, but then it was just like this creative expansion for the next, you know, through say three to five years. And then even now it's like, I don't know, there's something, maybe you feel this way about Judo or, but there's something that's like fun about the way the body moves and works and exploring something new and thinking about, hey, wrestling's been happening at a relative high level for, we'll say 80 to 90 years in America. And there's still new things being developed. And so when you see something new, you're like, oh damn, like that's great. Or like Jason Knolf may have to win Dixie. I'm like, why did I think of that shit? Why did I think of that so easy? I should have thought of that, you know? So there's this like obsession with the sport of wrestling and positions where I actually think sometimes think I wouldn't have smartphones, because I may have been distracted by my smartphone. Maybe I wouldn't have been, because I was so obsessed, but maybe, but you know, some days I couldn't finish the single leg on a specific person or maybe they were finishing on me and it was like, go home and I was just fucking obsessed about that one position. Like, okay, what am I missing here? And not just accepting like that whatever the coach says is the answer, but like, what am I missing? What ways can my body move that no one's told me it can move yet? Where can my arms go, right? Where can I do all these things? And so I would just obsess about these things. And then, you know, sometimes you come to the next thing and you say, oh, well maybe this, you know? And maybe it works, maybe it doesn't, maybe it works twice and it doesn't work the next time. And so you kind of like have this creative process and it's like, you know, there's a lot of things that are on the cutting room floor that never made it to the light because you thought they were good and they failed and they sucked. And then, you know, to the point where like my senior year, I got to this point where the people, then they were just figures, figures would wrestle in my head about positions I was thinking about. I wouldn't tell them what to do. They would just, they would go in my head. And then like, oh fuck, wait, that's it. That's it, that just happened. That's the move and then I go try to practice it. Sure enough, boom, that's the move. That's exactly, we have Alpha Zero playing, learning chess, you have, oh no, it's called self-plays. You have, did the figures have like a player? Did they have a human form or is it just like stick figures essentially? Yeah, it was not like humans, it was more like stick figures. It wouldn't stick figures exactly like they were. They had some volume? Yeah, it was like a gray person and they had three dimensions essentially because they had to see how the things moved and yeah. I mean, this is exactly what OpenAI and DeMI and the Google are, I don't know if you've seen, but there's something called reinforcement learning in artificial intelligence where you have like, they've done it for like sumo wrestling. You have like, you have these two stick figures that don't even know how to get up at first and they figure out how to stand in their two feet and then they figure out how to push the other person off of the pedestal. So, but what about like when you look at the Boston Dynamics, sometimes they have trouble with like jumping and balancing and the other stuff. So are they doing that same program or no? No, no, no, this, everything Boston Dynamics is doing is hard coded, so it's not learning the, all the sophisticated movements and strategies like high level strategies and movement, that's all something that Boston Dynamics does not do and if it does it like the parkour stuff, that's all hard coded. People like project and think like these robots have like discovered like how to move in sophisticated ways they haven't. Well, that's what when you and John were talking about the grappling robot. I mean, the one thing I was obsessing about in my head is that with the chess, right? If a chess piece moves, right, the horse can move like an L, right, it can only move like an L. It doesn't matter if it moves at two meters per second or seven meters per second, it can only move there, right? Whereas like a single leg, I can shoot a single leg with many different velocities, I can shoot at different angles, I can shoot with different amounts of force, right? I can shoot with my head up versus my head, I mean, right, all these things are gonna matter. We're talking about a human being defending the single leg, all of those things are gonna matter and that's where human beings are, who wrestle are calculating those things subconsciously. They're obviously not consciously calculating in their head, oh, the force is coming at me at this, so I need to do that, right, they're doing it. But see, the thing is, so you would absolutely, if you're doing a robot that you're wrestling, you're going to have to constrain the speed at which it moves and the power that it's able to deliver. So that presumably there'll be the limitation, so then it'll be just the same exact way as a human. But then, but it's the even, so if we go human, max force, for Jordan Brose double, max force, right? That's the highest, that's the highest we get, and then we go down from there. Even within that, it's like sometimes I can shoot a single leg with a maximum force of, I don't know, we'll say 20, that's the number, right? I don't know, I'll shoot it at 20, because I feel sometimes I shoot at 15, sometimes I shoot at 12, right? Because you feel something in your opponent that makes you do it differently, so they would have to learn how, and then all these different things, and sometimes maybe I clamp a little harder. So the robot would have to learn all these different incoming inputs to the system, and then create this reaction. Oh no, 100%, so this would be all continuous. So unlike chess, it would not, it's just chess is discrete, it's... One, and then... You move, it's a very specific set of moves. Now here, you would, those are all variables you control, and they're continuous variables. So the speed, the force, there's actuators, so there's all these joints, right? Yeah. You can move, I mean, it's just an optimization problem. It's kind of, it was fascinating, so I've been fascinated thinking about it since you guys talked about it. It was a long time ago, I listened to it probably three to four weeks ago, and I've kind of been obsessing about it ever since. Yeah, it just changes when... So unlike boxing, for example, or striking, once you grab a hold of somebody, you're now one body, right? So it's very complicated. It's not just shooting a double leg without, like maybe doing like faking a double leg and then shooting a double leg. That's very doable with robotics, but then like doing a clinch, and from there, doing like a Russian tie, like that. I think it's way harder than people realize in terms of how many things are involved, like the force of the grip, the leverage you're providing with all the different parts of the shoulder and the arm, and the torso, the twist, how much is your weight are you allocating, like leaning on the other person, like taking weight off of one of your legs and the other leg, all of that. I think that's the really interesting thing about humans is we're able to do all of this calculation. Subconsciously. Yeah, subconsciously. Yeah, and that's what I've been thinking about since it's like how many things, even these high school athletes who are like getting medium good are subconsciously thinking about all the time, or not even thinking about reacting to, but then even like for me, I'm a few hours of magnitude better than some of these kids that play, and so when I go like super hard, it's like I can feel their weight moving in the wrong direction, and so for me to off balance them or trip them or whatever is kind of easy sometimes, because they're not feeling it the right way, or their timing's just a little bit off, or the way they're grabbing the hip, maybe they should be up a little higher, these really small things. Yeah, I think that's all easy to take advantage of for a robot, it's just there's so many things. The big problem is ethically, I don't know how many people are willing to train with a robot, because you're gonna get hurt. Well, couldn't you make a robot train as a robot or no? Yes, but then it's expensive. So, because they're gonna get- Put the padding on that thing! I know, but then it's not, you know, it's, then you're not capturing the full- Why can't you put like some rubber coating on them, you know, something for that effect? You could, I mean, you could. You could, I mean, you're talking about robots that are, these are humanoid robots, so we're talking about $500,000 million robots. So, you would have to be motivated- To spend a lot of money. To spend a lot of money, because you have to have them wrestle for like a lot. To get better. Yeah, to get better. Yeah. And then the open question is, how long does it take to get good enough to be a human? I don't think we understand, I don't know, I don't think you understand how hard wrestling is. Yeah. Like, is it a really hard problem? Like, what's harder, chess or wrestling? Wrestling by far. I'm close. That's, yeah, that's the sense I have. So, because there's an infinite amount of moves, right? And possibilities, so once I shoot the single leg, now you have X amount of choices. Once you make your choice, now I have a choice, X amount of choices. Now you have X amount of choices in the defense, and we can just keep going back and forth, right? And this number becomes- Yeah, but the same happens with chess. Correct, but then in wrestling, you have to make these movements very instantaneously, right, because I should have seen like, I'm not gonna wait and say, what's your defense? Yeah. And then, also, again, based on the force and the vectors and the angles, you have to calculate that and adjust. So really, you know, if you're saying, why can't you just single leg? It's not like moving the chess, it's not one move, right? If you want to talk about different forces and stuff, it could be hundreds or thousands of different moves based on how hard I shoot it, the angle, the direction, all of those things. Yeah, but wait a minute. So, robots can do this kind of stuff really fast. People probably know the physiology of this, but the reaction speed for a human is maybe a hundred milliseconds, something like that. I don't know, from sensation to, like from the signal traveling up to your brain and down. I don't know what that number is, but robots certainly could do it way faster. You would actually have to like, constrain the speed. Well, so the robots are already killing the chess people, right, so, yeah, theoretically, they could eventually be wrestlers, but you asked what was harder, wrestling or chess. Yeah, I think wrestling is, because of the time component in it, and then the physicality of, is it this force or that force? Because if I'm gonna say, say we're in a seatbelt side by side, right? A wrestling seatbelt, not in a jiu jitsu. Based on the pressure you're giving me, I might do a bunch of different things, right? And so like to an untrained eye, they might both look like the same thing from you to a trained feel. It's like, well, in one case, it's really evident I should go this one, in another case, it's really evident I should go that way. So the other thing to consider, just like with chess, the AI systems, so human versus human plays a certain way together. They actually haven't considered a really large number of strategies that AI systems discover. So one possibility with a robot, they'll discover certain ties, a certain take down. That's what I'm saying. That like will dominate no matter what the human does. You think that, so you think there's that, so this, I mean, this is what I'm talking about, the wrestling's so fun is there's, even after 80, 90 years, there's this continuous evolution. So you think- There'll be some like low single type thing, like John Smith type of situation. Well, like a down block go behind is something that has really, I would say really in the last five-ish years has really been evolved. What's the go behind? Down block go behind. So when you, well, they just head inside or head outside, matters, but there's one for both. You shoot at me essentially, I take my leg, I boom. And then, so that was kind of in existence when I was in college, right? You down block them and you stop, but usually you hit on this side of their head, right? And now immediately as you shoot an eye attack, that shoulder, and then I start hitting a go behind on you. Right? And so like that in its current incarnation, it absolutely wasn't wrong. When I was in college, I would say it probably became popular five to seven years ago. So yeah, there's these big things that are happening. Now I really want to roll back because I want to be ahead of the game. I want to know what I'm missing. I mean, one interesting thing you have with Alpha Zero that plays chess is it sacrifices pieces much more than humans do. So give you a piece and not only does it give you a piece, it will wait a bunch of moves before it makes you pay. So. Because it knows that that's better for the long term. Long term. So like humans rarely sacrifice without getting the piece back like two or three moves after. Alpha Zero can wait like five moves. So basically you'll have potentially with wrestling, you might have a robot that like puts itself in bad positions, but in a certain kind of way then that will actually. Lures the opponent in to trap. Exactly. How much that was based on. Exactly. Well you basically narrow, one thing to do is you narrow the set of choices. You put yourself in a bad position, but it narrows the set of choices. For them, because they're not used to it. Yeah, they're not used to it. And then you drag them into your. Yeah, so but there's also, the problem is there's mechanical issues. Like it's actually just difficult to build robots that are able to sense, because we have sensation throughout our body. Yeah, it's just difficult to build that kind of robot. It's expensive. You start talking about multi-million dollars. And then people start asking you questions. Why did you invest all of this money? The last people who say you do, duh. Hello. It could be better investment. Okay, so I mentioned John Smith. He is, if people don't know, one of the great wrestlers, wrestling coaches ever. He's also creative like you. He spoke really highly of you. What do you think about that guy? Did you guys ever work together? Not really. So you know what, when I was a senior and I had the people wrestling in my head, I was lucky enough to be doing, I was pretty much graduated. So I did an independent study with the sports psychology. I was potentially in a grad school for sports psychology. Well, I actually did nine credits and then I just decided I didn't want to do it anymore. I continued learning on my own. But I had an independent study with the guy who was the head of USA track and field sports psych. So the class was, I got to go sit down and talk with him for an hour. And he was fascinated by me. So he didn't let me do homework. It was like the greatest three credits ever. We just talked. I learned so much. It was so awesome. But so I started, so one time it came up that I had these robot, people wrestling in my head. I said, well, who else do you think that John Smith happened? So I went and got John Smith's number and called him. I said, hey, you ever had these people wrestling in your head? And he said, yeah, but as soon as I stopped coaching, they went away. Same thing happened to me. As soon as I started coaching, they went away. So if I really force myself now and I'm like, I see something in practice or, it's really high level because high school wrestling, I don't want to, maybe I steal that, but it's like, it's a little bit lower level, right? So if like Keegan, for example, who won the journey, if he's struggling with a problem or asked me a question and I can force myself to like see the bodies moving and think about it again, you know, kind of like I was in the early age, but it won't just flow there anymore. So he said it went away and for me, it went away also. By the way, if you can pause on the bodies in your head, how are they generating new ideas? Are they just kind of? I don't know. You tell me. So it's just, they're just like scrambling in your head. It would be specifically based on a problem I was struggling with or a specific position, you know? It goes in for a single and then go from there. Yeah, so I'm sitting in geography class and, you know, I don't have to work that hard because it's easy, right? And yeah, I'm just sitting there like kind of acting like I'm looking at the board and these guys are wrestling and I'm watching them wrestle and yeah, sometimes they come up with a really good solution. Is there somebody you looked up to style wise? Gable, John Smith, all these like legends that has people. Probably Gable, or it's a Gable. John Smith, after the fact. So the problem with wrestling in my era was you couldn't watch it. There was no access, right? It wasn't really available. Even if you want to say, go find a bunch of John Smith, man, they're kind of hard to find, right? There's a couple of them on YouTube, but I've obviously seen all of those. But in my era, there really wasn't any of it. So it was hard to be a fan of something. And that's why wrestling has, the fans are going like this because now you flip on the flow app and you can watch something that's happening in Europe, right? We can do this easily so we can be a fan of people. So now I'm more a fan of wrestling than I was then because there just was no access. So now I can watch someone I like and say, oh shit, like that guy's wrestling. Oh, boom, I put my phone on, I watch them wrestle, that type of thing. You know, on a quick rant, it's really frustrating that you can't watch the Olympics. Oh my God, so frustrating. I've been, I think I'm gonna go to war on this point. Go to NBC's headquarters, I'll go with you. You got a soldier here. I was talking to Jimmy, Jimmy Pedro. He was surprised by this too. Most matches you can't see, even you talk about like comeback, Gabriel Steeves and you can't see the full match. You get like a crappy highlight. So the two biggest things in reality, and really the three, the NCAA Championship and ESPN, the Olympic trials are on NBC and the Olympics are NBC. And these companies are so big, they don't have a department dedicated to selling the rights to that footage, right? So the rights to wrestling footage, which no one really cares all that much about it, a niche, are the exact same as track and field or basketball and the Olympics. So yes, all of this stuff is completely inaccessible to us. The NCAs, the Olympic trials and the Olympics, you can't go watch old film on it, it sucks. Yeah, old, the current film. Yeah. So you came and watched the Game of Match? The Game of Match, no. They did a, they do something that I noticed the fuck out of me. What? Okay, they do like a three or two minute highlight. So it's like they capture the most important thing, but it's all about the buildup. Yeah, yeah. It's like that very beginning when you step on the mat and the nerves and you walk out and like that, I mean, I don't know. You miss, then when the triumph happens or the heartbreak happens, it has that much more power. Yeah, if you wanna go to war with NBC or ESPN, I'm happy to join that. I think, unfortunately, IOC. Well, I mean, does the IOC own that? IOC is selling for the Olympics is the one that's making. Well, so NBC broadcast, so they obviously have the live rights. You would think they would have recorded, I mean, they're the ones recording it. You would think they keep the rights when you think. No, no, no, they're getting a license of it. They're getting exclusive license, but like the, for example, I've had this, I talked to Travis Stevens, the G-Dope player, and there's a really sort of famous match. It's a heartbreak in his career from 2012 Olympics, where he goes against the German, Oli Bischoff, whatever. It's a 20 minute match to go to war, and that's not available anywhere, but it's uploaded on YouTube and set to private. The reason I know this is on the IOC channel. So they've uploaded all of these matches. They have it and put it up? So actually, so my Olympic match, the one I won, got put public, and so I don't know if it was private. It got put up on YouTube. I was allergic to it the week of my Jake Paul fight. It was so dumb. I'm like, why the, this is, every 13 years late, this is bullshit. This should have been up. So I mean, okay, so what about Olympic trials footage? That has to be the USOC then or NBC? So I know, okay, so I know Flow, right? Because that worked for them. I know if Flow buys your event or whatever, right? They buy the rights. Generally in the contract, they'll have rights to both livestream it and then use that footage at any point moving forward. So those matches live on Flow's website. That's why I would be surprised that if NBC didn't have something similar. Flow does a pretty good job of providing like a place where you can watch all these matches. NBC does not. Does not, yeah. And also there's an argument with Flow as well, but certainly with Olympics, there's a difference between what Flow does and what the Olympics represent. What do you mean by that? Like it feels like the Olympics, which is what the charter says should be as accessible as possible. Yes, that's true. Like you should really lower the barrier for entry for the Olympics. You know that's what the charter says, but those people in the IOC, these are the worst people ever. Yeah. They're very bad. Well, they're not bad. They just lost touch of the dream they once had when they joined the IOC. Well, I would argue all the way back that these are rich fat cats who, like I get so mad about the NCAA, which finally now got rid of this term, bullshit term, amateurism. It's like, well, there's some Holy Grail where you can't make money to be an amateur athlete, but the people who own the IOC or the people who own the institutions, college institutions are making boatloads of money off of you, that's crap. So you competed, like you said, at the 2008 Olympics. Did you believe you can win gold? Yeah, absolutely. So your mental game was on point. Yeah, I was ready. So what went wrong? This wasn't good enough. That was what I said. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, so at that point in time, it was my first year of international competition. So when I came out in 2007, it was my first time making 74 kilograms, which is pretty small for me. I had some failures, but then quickly I turned that around and I was having success. In America, I was beating everyone. I don't wanna say easy, but yeah, I was doing really well. I went international one time and there was one match I got cheated on, the Russians, they're cheaters. I think she was Ukraine, not Russia. I lost one real match where I actually lost and it was to Dennis Sargusz who would go on to win through world title, he was behind the tee of that year and it was competitive, you know? So I knew, okay, I'm going with the best guys in the world. I beat a bunch of other guys who were good and had passed decent results. So I knew I was right there. Unfortunately, I ran this guy, Ivan Fundera, and I had someone who's scouting reports from actually my high school coach, who now coaches for our academy, John Messammerich, and Fundera was the worst stylistic matchup. I got him and I lost him second round. So I wasn't good enough. Had I decided to keep wrestling, I probably would have gotten better, but at that point, I just wasn't in the cards. So in your division was, like you said, S-T-F, my vice-s-t-f, that guy is special. He's very special. So that would be my other guy that you asked earlier who I had enjoyed watching, and that was a guy, it was kind of after the fact because it was hard to access footage, but he was a lot of fun to watch. What do you think made him great? A lot of people talk about him as potentially one of the greatest ever. Absolutely, I mean, so he won six and three, six worlds, three Olympics, nine total, which there's only one or two people above that. So again, it was hard to watch any live footage of him, but from what I've seen, his feel is different. He was just ahead of his time and the feel and the touch he had for certain moves and different things, because obviously physically he's kind of un-imposing. He's taller and skinnier, which is, it can work in wrestling, but it is by less represented. So, yeah, he was special, so good. Do you take any inspiration from, let's talk about Dagestan in general, what do you think makes those wrestlers great? Yeah, it's fascinating. Have you ever read the book The Talent Code? Yeah. It's great. And that kind of talks about these talent hotspots all around the world. So now, obviously with our wrestling academies, we try to take some lessons from that and apply it. I gotta assume they didn't cover Dagestan in that book specifically, but I gotta assume a lot of the same principles that are in that book apply to Dagestan in wrestling. They did South Korea and women's golf. They did Curaao in baseball. They picked a lot of these other places that were really elite. I think maybe Moscow and women's tennis also. So I think all these things that make any group great or organization is probably the same things that's happening there. Well, the hardship, I mean, is there something specific about wrestling that can create so many great champions? From that area. So obviously they're all, they all love it like it's a big deal that wrestling is specifically is a big deal there. You know, they do Sambo also obviously. So that's part of it is a lot of the kids are doing it. They obviously are rough tumble, tough life. Getting a lot of fights. And then I think that also that a lot of them, it is a way out right there. The elite level athletes in that part of the world from my understanding are really well compensated compared to what the average person makes and it's treated really well. So people see it as a way out. Whereas like, and then honestly, if America's getting better, but in 2008, the reason I went to MMA was because I didn't want to be poor my whole life. You know what I'm saying? It sucked. It's like, well, I don't want to make $20,000 for the next 48 years. So I'm going to go do something else. If I could have made, even I need to be rich, right? If I could have made $100,000 or $70,000 wrestling, I probably would have kept wrestling. So I think there's factors. And obviously now they have a really like, a bunch of really good people in one area. So there's probably, and it's been going on for a long time. So there's probably been a bunch of like adults and coaches that are coming back and helping that progress. So yeah, a lot of those things that happen. So I'm definitely going to travel there to talk to them because I can speak Russian. That makes it very, makes me uniquely qualified to. My brother can speak a little bit of Russian. Your brother can? Yeah. Okay. Like a little bit like squares and. No, no, no, no, no. Like he would, oh man, don't make me oversell. I think he would be able to have a conversation with you. I think. Okay. Probably not like you. What's the reason he knows Russian? I don't know why he got obsessed with languages. And so his college degree is actually, what are they called? Interdes, where you have three minors. We had a minor in Russian, a minor in Spanish and maybe Japanese, I'm messing up. It's definitely Russian and Spanish are for sure. I don't know what the third one is. No, but yeah, the Afghanistan, it's really fascinating. But the emphasis on technique, the lighter drilling, like they don't really go super hard. Yeah. And I only spent a couple, so I was there, I was in Vladykovka in 2008. That was where the World Cup was. We had to train there for like two days afterwards. So I didn't get to dig deep, did dig deep into what was going on or anything. But yeah, I mean, I think sparring has sparring is very beneficial for wrestling. Not like sparring MMA is we fight, right? Sparring in wrestling is, so I always just describe it to be really simple. If we're drilling, it's relatively 0% resistance. If we're going as hard as we can, that's 100%. There's all this gray area in the middle, that's sparring, right? And so, if you have a good relationship, like, especially calling me and my brother, we could just go and we know where each other's at. We didn't even have to talk about it, right? But like in my wrestling, I will say, okay, hey, I want you guys to go 50% in this position. Or I want the high crotch guy, I want him to shoot and this is for him. So I want him to go 70. And defensive guy, I want you to go 40. So you're not supposed to be trying to win here, you're gonna go a little lighter. I want you to give him some looks. So I think it has really taken hold in America. I think it's really beneficial for success. And I think that's, I mean, America's doing better than we've ever done historically. Well, that's 70 and 40, that's like an art form to find that right place. Because like what the really good people I've trained with, they go much closer to 100% speed wise, or like, but without like forcing things that you would when you're going. It's some weird combination of things that like, if you truly earn a technique, then you're given that technique. Yeah, yeah. But like, if you don't, you don't. Yeah. And then it becomes much less injury prone, it becomes somehow more fun, more dynamic, you don't get stuck in positions. It's just a lot of movement. Yeah, the one thing, so you and John talked about, you know, like different ways to learn and get better. And so I think John obviously innovated within the sport of jiu-jitsu. And so for us, and maybe there's just a differentiator for us, I think about it like. So, sorry to interrupt, you have this Academy, you sent me this plan, that you have like a really well thought through plan for how to develop a good wrestler. So I think it's, for me there's four categories, right? There's the teaching, which is like, you don't know shit. You're coming in and I'm showing you the move, and you're literally going out there and you're trying. To me, that's not even drilling. That's like teaching, like you're trying to learn something. So obviously in someone's earlier periods, they're spending a lot of time in that phase, because they literally don't even know how to move their bodies the right way. Once you learn the skill, then there's the drilling, because you need to, you absolutely have to get those reps to become really proficient in that movement, and then the sparring, and then the live, right? And so like, I think, obviously by the time you get to the kind of, I don't want to say end point, right? But further on, the time you spend teaching is so, I don't want to say, I'm sorry, in the learning teaching phase is not insignificant, but it's so much smaller, because to someone who's really good, who I've coached for 10 years, I don't have to give this big, long, drawn out explanation. I just have to say, hey, move your hand a little differently, right? Or just do this, right? We don't have to spend any time there. So I think that's like something that consumes for the younger kids, say five through 12 or 13, we're consuming a massive amount of time there on that teaching, learning phase. And then as we get older, that time wanes a lot. But that makes total sense, right? Yeah. It's funny, because when you look at like, Jiu-Jitsu schools, they spend a lot of time in the teaching, learning, and then the live, it feels like there's not enough drilling. I like how you draw a distinction there. Because it feels like you're always starting from scratch, like people have like very crappy short term memory. Like they're not, like the way teaching is done, is you show a technique from scratch. And it seems disjoint. It is, for sure. Especially if you have a class that's been with you for a while, you don't have to start from scratch. You can say, hey, let's focus on this one little thing here. Or after we do this, let's do that. You know, and you kind of start putting it all together. And then with Jiu-Jitsu, the thing that I really struggled with was a couple things. It was, and this is not speaking for all of the Jiu-Jitsu, it's my personal experience through the sport. And I actually found my, so when I unretired, I found someone really great that I loved. And I really wish, it was Mark Lehman, I don't know if you know him at all. I wish I would have found him earlier because he was just tremendous. But number one, there's no drilling. So it's like in wrestling, I can boil down to, I can probably name you the best six moves, right? So we need, as younger people, single leg, right? Single legs can be the most proficient takedown. It always has been, I don't know, probably always will be unless they figure out something different. The robot, the robot figure's not different. We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. Why? Because everyone's gonna do that, right? We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. So just like say an armbar or some type of sweep, right? Why can't we go get 50 reps there? Hey, I mean, by the time I've been in your Jiu-Jitsu school for two years, I better know a fucking armbar. I better know it. So don't spend 10 minutes teaching me, just tell me to go hit 50 reps. And then if one, I'm hitting my reps, if there's something I'm doing wrong, then just say, hey, Ben, move your legs a little bit that way or raise your hips up a little more, right? Like correct as you're drilling, so you're getting all these reps at it, so you're becoming more proficient. And then the other thing I really struggled with was to your point during live, so many times it's just this five minute go, go, go. And that's not the most efficient way to learn because when you have two people, especially when they're focused on winning, and you say go, they're gonna go to whatever they do best. Well, if I'm trying to make you good at something, I don't want you doing what you do best all the time. I need you doing some other things, right? If you have a great single leg, but you can't shoot to the other side of their body, we need to work on that, right? You need to start shooting the other side. There's some sense that you, it's not like you should be told what to work on, but you should be told to work on the thing that you want to work on. Meaning, because I don't know, maybe you can comment on this, but everybody develops different games as you get better and better. There's a set of things you need to be working on. So I actually have, like when I, especially when I'm like training very seriously, I'll have a specific technique they have in mind, and I have a sheet of paper on the side where I literally, my head keep coming off, how many times I put myself in that position and pulled off the technique, and that's all I care about in like training. So I'll just, whatever it is, if it's a guillotine, it's a guillotine, arm drag, arm drag, but I want to make sure I don't, I love numbers, so I'll say like, I'll make sure I get 50 arm drags, and I'm not getting off the mat until I do, and that, you know, if it takes- Drilling or live contest? So in this, in the thing I'm describing right now is the live contest. Okay, got it. But drilling, obviously, drilling, so I feel like- I can't find a drilling part, like it's so hard to find drilling partners, even- So boring. It's annoying to me that this is boring, and there's nothing more annoying to me than the look of boredom on another person's face when we're drilling. Yeah. It's like- Do you really think drilling's that beneficial to you? Cause you said it to Josh. Yes, and he thinks I'm an idiot, but yes. Why? Why am I an idiot, or why am I just so beneficial? Let's go with two trick-plishes. Why is it so beneficial? I think for me, there's a meditative aspect to it where the more you drill, the more you start noticing the details. Okay, let me push back a little bit here. I'm not gonna push back all the way, cause every time, if I was wrestling, I wouldn't want a headcratching, like whatever, right? But even, so say like at a high level, when I'm really wrestling 10 years ago, even during that drill portion, if we talk about the resistance of our opponent from zero to 100, it's very likely that my partner at that point, because there's people I'm really comfortable with, they're probably at least going 20 or 30, right? They're probably giving me a certain look with the sprawl, or I gotta get through their hands. If I don't set it up right, they might put their arm down. So it's like, we are drilling, cause we're wrestling at a really low resistance level, but there's a little bit of sparring. Oh yeah, the 20%. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's not really drilling, cause I think it's drilling, I think literally you're shooting and I'm just gonna boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, type of thing, you know? It's very hard to be a dummy that doesn't do 20%. So you're gonna do 20%, yeah. So yes, that's 20%. But- So that's like sparring a little bit then. No, but they're not really resisting, they're just giving you the right frame, they're giving you the right movement, they're being an intelligent dummy, especially. I mean, but also like the really important component of this is you pick the techniques for which it's beneficial. If the technique has dynamic elements to it, you don't want to be doing that with, I'm saying like there's certain moves and I like those moves and I select the game base in those moves that- Like so are you drilling to get better or are you drilling just to work out? No, to get better. That's what I'm trying to tell you. I believe you can become like exceptionally good very fast by drilling. But how? First of all, let me ask you an empirical question. Let me, have you actually drilled 10,000 times a particular move? Millions. You haven't drilled millions. Hundreds of thousands, likely. I think you're just saying numbers. I don't think you know what 100,000- It's astronomical, it's way more than 10,000. I don't think you know what 100,000 feels like. Dude, there was a 10 year period where I wrestled every single day, that's- Yeah. That's 3,000 days, so you're telling me 10,000, that's only three of them a day. I do way more than that. Three of them- Probably 30 of them a day. That's 100,000. Yeah. Yeah, hundreds of thousands. I doubt you should get 30 a day for- I did, for sure, 100%. There's no doubt. All right. Because some days I might do 100, right? Yeah. So 30 of 30 is not very many. Especially if we count all reps, if we're counting drilling and live. So like our college coach would make us just drill a lot and I hated it. So I would rebel and just kind of give a little spar. You shoot a high crotch, we'll start. Coach wants to drill a high crotch. Okay, we'll start. You shoot the high crotch, that's great. Then I'm gonna sit at the corner, I'm gonna give you my hip, or I'm gonna try something. So then you have to react. And I would argue that all skill level past the beginner stuff is some necessity of that, right? I'm gonna do this, then what are you gonna do? It's back and forth. I shoot a single leg, what are you gonna do? I shoot a high crotch, what are you gonna do? And you have to start unconsciously programming these things in your head because you have to constantly think about it, it's gonna be too slow to actually hit it in math, right? But the drilling is the unconscious programming. But the simple movement, the first simple movement, the first simple movement, that single leg, or the high crotch or arm drag, whatever. Like, I feel like the amount you're gonna get better at it is so minuscule compared to the amount you're gonna gain at doing other things around it. You see that? No, but that's the key word you feel. Okay, I think if we did a study on it that I would be proven to correct. No, perhaps. So first of all, your brain as an exceptionally creative combat athlete, it's clear that you don't like the boredom of drilling. Like, it's obvious that you're such a creative energy that you're just not going to be somebody who's going to enjoy that. So enjoyment is probably, having an active mind is really important. So the question is, do you have the kind of makeup that has an active mind during a drilling on a dummy? And I have that mind. Like, I can- But do you really think, okay, so if you're, what's the picket of technique? What technique do you wanna drill a lot? I would do jiu-jitsu or wrestling. Whatever you want. It's hard to describe with words, but certain guard passes. Let me think, just the guard pass. Okay, so you have a guard pass and you get it to be, I'd say, nine and a half out of 10, right, just from a technical standpoint. Don't you think you need some resistance to feel? Because essentially all benefit after that is going to be, what are they gonna try to do to me? And if they shift that way, do I need to sink here or move there? So it's like, I actually think we're agreeing, but maybe terminology-wise- Well, the split is the important thing. Like how much of each. So- So I think it is spar. Like, I think it's a very light touch spar is what you're talking about, which is, in my opinion, really isn't drilling. And it's because drilling past the basic proficiency, I don't think brings much value. But that's what I'm trying to tell you is I think it does. I think, I think, doing that same movement, I think you begin to learn more over time. Like you're saying, like, once you get the basic proficiency, then there's diminishing returns. I don't think so. Yeah, that's what I think. I don't think so. I think everything has diminishing returns when you're learning a technique. But with something as complex as wrestling or grappling, if you can have way more gains over here, why focus on going from a 9.7 to a 9.8? If this other area, if you're spending so much time here that there's other areas left unexplored and you can make gigantic gains over there. No, but you're gonna lose, I think a lot depends on your style. I think a lot is determined by how good you are at one thing. And so if you want to become a master of a particular thing and then make your whole game where it's all pulled into that system, then I don't know. I think one is too small of a number. Yeah, small. I feel like you can't be easily this, like I've- Yeah, you want to create funnels. Funnels. Funnels, right? Where everything goes into a few positions where you're dealing with 100%. Yeah. But I feel you can get like drilling on a dummy 80% of the time and 20% of the time live rolling with people worse than you. Like a little bit worse than you or a lot worse than you. Yeah, so I think I definitely think. So my buildup would be, so we're talking a complex technique, right? So by the time we're talking, we'll say a late high school kid who's pretty proficient, he's probably done the drilling part. So then now it's like, okay, if I want to get something new to you, I'll probably tell you, you'll probably be able to do the basic premise within five to 10 minutes if they're good, right? Do this, okay, they do it. Then it's like, okay, so now here's from here, what we're gonna do, we're gonna go light sparring. So I know you have success because I need you to complete the task in order to get better at it. That's something a lot of people in wrestling mess up is they just want to go to the toughest person. But if you go to the toughest person, you're not gonna actually execute on any skills. You're gonna get a workout and I need you to execute because I need you to get good at this in order to get good at it. You have to get all the way through the technique. Why do you need them to complete just so they gain confidence in the technique or they go through all the stuff- They have to feel all the way through. Like if I said, learn a high crotch when you're drilling with stop halfway every time. But you're not actually gonna be able to do it because you're gonna stop, you're gonna have the feel. So try it on someone, spar lightly, get it. Do it on someone who's not as good as you get it. Then kind of work your way up the ladder so you can get it on someone your own skill level or maybe better than you in a live competition. So it's like, I don't know, I feel like that basic drilling, so I kid like Keegan who I've heard a few times, I feel like if there's something new, I could literally tell him like, this is what I want you to do and he's such a great feel like, he could go drill it proficiently within probably a minute or two. But then to hit it on someone high level, that's gonna take quite a while longer. And that's a mix of drilling and- Sparring on people a little bit worse than you. Yeah, and then equal and then better. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, because there's just with grappling, there's such like a feel component to the pressure, the movement and all these things. And there's still, I said, there's so many things you can throw at someone out of one position, not just moves, but moves at different levels of force or whatever. Are you and these kids developing like a big picture strategy of like, what are the main setups and take downs and just like a whole system? So we, you know, I kind of sent you our technique book, right, and how we kind of go approach it. So I think in wrestling, you're going to need, you're gonna need a handful of things just off the word go, right? You're going to, so I think on our feet, I need to be able to take the side of the body, I need to be able to take that side of the body, I need to be able to bring you underneath me, I need to be able to go around you, right? Now we can accomplish those different ways, but we should have all of those weapons if we're gonna be really good some way, right? So if I neglect one of those, so if I neglect the ability to say, pull you down, right, from handlock you. Now, if I have a good shot and you're smart, you're just gonna lower your stance. So my shot is not gonna be as successful and I have the inability to pull you down, right? So I kind of need all of those so I can, as they get better, I can point those things out. On bottom, my folks out bottom, there's certain things like you have to be good at like right defense, right? You have to, I mean, at high level, or you're just, when you get it in, you're just getting stuck there, not gonna be able to escape. But besides that, yeah, there's a multitude of things that you can choose from, and I'm gonna, depending on your body style and what you're good and bad at, I'm gonna probably develop something a little different. I might give you, hey, you do the quad pod, you'd be better than knee slide, whatever. Yeah, top kind of same thing. I have to ask you, Baka Bheeb. So I remember a while ago, Rogan said that that's the perfect fight. For Baka Bheeb, you are. So let me ask two questions. The first, do you think you can beat him in an MMA match when you're at your peak? I don't like, yeah, I mean, it's one of those people where people will get really mad at me if I say yes, but yeah, I mean, I think. But how would you do it? How would you solve that puzzle? Yeah. I mean, we would grapple, and I think I would be better than him, but I, you know, I, it's actually a weird saying as people, like, yeah, I'm right, you're full of shit, you know, and, but that's, no one out grappled him, right? I mean, nobody did, and maybe I'm wrong on this, but if we look at the best possible candidates, I'm definitely one of them, and then obviously I have a small size advantage too. So in a wrestling match, so we can just reduce that MMA match to a wrestling match, what do you think is the right strategy on him? Like, do you understand his style that, his wrestling style, the pressure he applies, do you understand how the hell he makes that happen? Yeah, I mean, he never, unfortunately, fought any real, who I would say really, really high level wrestlers. I was actually really disappointed how bad Justin Gage's wrestling was, because Justin Gage had some solid success, but his wrestling was really bad in that fight. Gage had success in the NCAA? Yeah, I think he was seventh place, maybe, or somewhere, he was definitely all American. It was lower though. So yeah, I would like to see how he dealt with someone who was like, who I think, oh man, this guy's a really high level wrestler, because, you know, we saw in his early in his career, but, you know, Glace and T-Bow did give him some issues earlier in his career. So I would like to see him in that situation, and see how he does. I would love to, like, you know, I just love wrestling and grappling, like, yeah, I'd love this. Someone said, hey, Ben, you know, could be more than roll with you. Okay, I'm there tomorrow. It sounds like a blast, let's go. He's probably competitive as hell. Yeah. You're still competitive? I know when to be and when not to be, like, you know, say if I'm going to the high school kids, or I'm not gonna be competitive, because then I'm just being a dick. How would you take him down? What? What, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, we'll probably try to text sing-a-licks and stuff. Sing-a-licks? Yeah. I haven't, okay. No, no, no. No, honestly, I'm, I don't have the slightest clue. I'd have to feel it, I'd feel him out, but sing-a-licks is my best take. People talk about his wrestling being really good. Yeah. The people that train around the practice. So okay, so I, I grilled someone. I will not say who on the Ed Ruth thing, because Ed Ruth is very elite at folks out wrestling. He never became that great at fighting, unfortunately. Wait, Ed Ruth wrestled Khabib? They were on the same team for awhile, yeah. And there was rumors that Khabib beat him up. And I said, I sure can't believe that. And I've heard that that was, if they were just straight wrestling, Ed would get slightly the better of it. Well, Ed was just like one of the greats. He's great. He's really good. Yeah. So that was what I heard. But in an MMA setting, because of all the tools that Khabib would get him. I don't know. What, but I agree. I agree with Rogan on this one. That would have been good to see. Yeah. So yeah, if Khabib wants to work out, I'd love it. I love wrestling and grappling. I don't do much jujitsu because I just don't have time for it anymore. I'm at the wrestling academy like every single day. But I love jujitsu while I did it. And if I didn't have wrestling academies, I probably would still be doing jujitsu. Yeah, you did well in jujitsu as well. But I'm gonna ask you a ridiculous question. Who's the greatest of all time, freestyle or folk style? Oh, wrestling. Wrestling. Hmm. Well, I will say my knowledge past like the year 2000 is really not that great. Which direction? Sorry, after 2000? Before, because you can't find any film or anything. And so you hear about- So you need evidence. You need direct evidence. I wanna be able to watch them and see them in field of times, field of opponents and all those things to really like, I hate giving bad answers. So there's just not enough footage of any of those people. We go back to someone like Alexander Medved. Like you can't find footage. You can't find anything on it. You know, it's like, who is he wrestling? I'm not sure. So post 2000, I think, and obviously just freestyle. So- Americans, Russian. S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S