 This is The Guardian. On Tuesday morning UK time, almost a year since Joe Biden oversaw the withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan, we learned that a CIA drone strike on the capital city Kabul had killed the man at the top of Al-Qaeda, the successor of Osama bin Laden, Ayman al-Zawahiri. Now justice has been delivered. Not even 48 hours later, the Speaker of the House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi defied both the Chinese government and the White House by landing in Taiwan and promising that America is committed to the security of the country which China argues is a breakaway region that belongs to Beijing. We will not abandon our commitment to Taiwan and we are proud of our enduring friendship. It's been a huge week for US foreign policy but has it been a successful one? I'm Jonathan Friedland, columnist at The Guardian and this is Politics Weekly America. Always beware of August as a veteran of the Gulf War. I remember that well. Philip Crowley is the former US Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs under Barack Obama. Back in 2011 he publicly criticized the Pentagon for the alleged mistreatment of Chelsea Manning, the US soldier convicted of providing the whistleblower website WikiLeaks with classified diplomatic cables. He resigned soon afterwards. So Philip Crowley knows a thing or two about defying the White House. There's a considerable difference between being an Assistant Secretary of State and being the Speaker of the House and the number three member of the government. I happen to feel that Nancy Pelosi made the only decision that was politically viable here in the United States once China made its opposition to her travel so public for her or for the Biden administration to reschedule that. I think it would have provided a weapon that Republicans would be more than happy to use in 2022 and 2024. Let's just talk again about this specific visit. The most senior US politician to visit Taiwan in 25 years, Nancy Pelosi, has said America will never abandon the island during a trip that's been condemned as a major provocation by China. I want to get into the politics of all that in a minute, but just for now bring us up to speed on the situation in Taiwan, but particularly the American view of it. Well, as a matter of diplomatic practice going back to 1979, the United States has seen China as, for example, the holder of the permanent seat on the UN Security Council. But in 1979, it cut off formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan. But then Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act. A real question is whether that policy is now dated. The presumption all along was that the US-1 China policy was based on the aspiration that as China developed, as China became more prosperous, it would also become more or less more democratic. Just explain for people who are not across the terminology, explain that notion, the one China policy. The United States has a one China policy believing that Taiwan is a part of mainland China, but that the status of Taiwan as an autonomously governed entity should never be changed by force. So the aspiration was that as China developed, it would actually begin to look more like Taiwan. But as we see over the past several years under President Xi, it has become more prosperous and more autocratic. And so into the middle of this policy that probably is showing some rust comes Nancy Pelosi to demonstrate, you know, her support for Taiwan as a democratic entity, not necessarily as an independent entity. And obviously that has riled the leadership in Beijing. Because until now, the United States has maintained again in a term of sort of Washington jargon strategic ambiguity, keeping it vague, what exactly America's response would be if there was any change in Taiwan status. And that delicate balance is what in some ways has been disrupted this week. Well, the aspect of strategic ambiguity has meaning on both sides. It is to say to Beijing, if you use force to change the status of Taiwan, we reserve the right to come to Taiwan's defense. And Joe Biden has been vocal in that. We agree with the one China policy, we signed onto it, and all the attendant agreements made from there. But the idea that that can be taken by force, just taken by force is just not is just not appropriate. We'll dislocate the entire region and be another action similar to what happened in Ukraine. And so it's a burden. There is this equilibrium that essentially says keep things as they are. It is absolutely to keep things as they are to maintain a status quo, and then hope that both sides will evolve in a way that is peaceful. And so then Nancy Pelosi obviously has a history of being robust on this issue of Taiwan and its democratic representative nature announces that she's or it becomes known that she wants to make this visit. The crucial question, I suppose, is why did she want to make that visit? And particularly why now? Well, she was actually supposed to visit Taiwan earlier in the year she developed Covid. So this was postponed. Yes, Nancy Pelosi is a fervent defender of Taiwan. She is a fervent critic of China and its human rights policy. Congress continues to take bold, bipartisan action to defend human rights in China and hold the Chinese government accountable. And I think to any step back for a second, if you look at this strategically, there are three major power competitions in the world today. One is the United States and Russia. And obviously, given Russia's invasion of Ukraine, it does bring the issue of Taiwan into immediate focus because there are so many parallels between the two. Obviously, the rivalry with China and the US struggle politically with itself. And so I think Nancy looked at these things all three. And in her mind, she determined that a visit to Taiwan was affirming across these three competitions. And I happen to agree with her. That's interesting, because I think the layperson would look at it and think you've got enough trouble at the moment dealing with Russia, Ukraine. Why poke the hornets nest of Beijing in terms of relationship with Taiwan right now? You know, we know that administrations often struggle to cope with more than one crisis at once. And if this was just simmering away, wouldn't it have been better to keep it that way? Well, I mean, certainly the White House privately believed that what added to the risk here was the fact that Beijing is approaching this major party Congress where Xi is going to be cleared for a third term in office. So if you do something this overt, your risk that he would feel an obligation to respond in some meaningful way. And obviously, we're prepared for Chinese military exercises in the coming days and weeks. Taiwan's defense ministry says China has fired multiple ballistic missiles during a set of military exercises in the air and the sea encircling Taiwan. You know, and I think Beijing struggles to understand that the Congress is an independent legislative body and it's co-equal under our system. And so Nancy Pelosi is able to make her own decisions. The president may not like it, but there's ultimately nothing he can do about it. Let me push you on that, because that's a key part of the story. This notion that the White House apparently opposed it and she decided, look, she's a, as you say, a separate branch of government, she can do her own thing. Some are skeptical about that, because they are the crucial difference between now and the 1990s situation is that the president and the speaker are of the same party and they're close politically, they're close political allies. So people think, was there perhaps some coordination? Is the White House opposition more public than real? And if so, is there some kind of good cop, bad cop routine where Joe Biden gets to keep more of the strategic ambiguity while Nancy Pelosi gets to send a message? Quite possibly. Yeah. I mean, the president did wade into this indirectly by saying publicly that the military opposed this. He never said that he did. So I think he was reserving some wiggle room. There are some critics of the president who say, he should have had a private conversation with Nancy Pelosi, he probably did, and not make this a public issue at all so that he could preserve the ability to convince her, yes, you should go to Taiwan, now is not the time. But I think this is where this third aspect does come into play. When you're president of the United States, you do pay attention, you own geopolitics in the world. And we like to think that there's a bright line between foreign policy and domestic politics, there really isn't. And we're coming up to the midterms here, Nancy Pelosi was squarely focused, not just on her history of criticism of China's human rights support for Taiwan. But she clearly understood that given Beijing's public opposition, there really was not a choice here. Nancy Pelosi is always used as a foil by Republicans on campaigns, this would be yet another one. If she was seen to be buckling to Chinese pressure. Absolutely. So I do think that this is a perfect example of where not only there's a geopolitical rationale for, there's a geopolitical rationale against, but there's a compelling political argument that said once Beijing said you can't go to Taiwan, of course she had to turn around and stop in Taipei as she did. So as would have been very predictable, China has responded both with words of condemnation, but also, as I think you referred to those military exercises in the area, sending a message to say that we are the big power in these waters, as it were, given all that, given that it's now a done deal, it's a fate accomplice, she has been and gone. What should the president do now? You're in this odd situation where Republicans have been cheering her move. Yeah, Republican senators coming out, led by Senator Sullivan also as well. You see Senator Mitch McConnell signing onto this press release about two dozen or so Republican senators saying they support Speaker Pelosi. As if almost daring Joe Biden to be as strong as she has been. How do you think the White House should play this? Well, there will be a little bit of theater on this on all sides. Obviously, Beijing is now compelled to respond. They threatened a fervent response and they'll have to deliver something that at least provides optics of a response to their own people. And you think there'll be more than just training exercises, do you? I would hope not. I think it'll be some sort of belligerent theater, but hopefully it will not be something that requires a further US response. Certainly, as you go through this, the United States will probably send another carrier through the Taiwan Straits to make a point about freedom of navigation. But I'm sure quietly, the administration is saying, okay, look, it happened. This is not something that happens all the time. Let's get through this, refocus, calm down and get back to trying to build a relationship that is sustainable based on cooperation where you can, based on competition where there is competition. And let's figure this out. Do you think the president's messaging has been confusing? I mean, particularly on this question of military action and whether or not the US would act to support Taiwan in the event of either an attempted invasion or military action by Beijing. I mean, we did hear Joe Biden saying words suggesting, yes, the US would be there militarily, in fact, we can hear that. Are you willing to get involved militarily to defend Taiwan if it comes to that? Yes. You are. That's the commitment we made. But listening to that, Philip Crowley, what do you think? Is there a lack of clarity? Is Joe Biden's position changing? Well, I mean, I think sometimes Joe Biden speaks from the heart. And that's what he has done in multiple times where he said, hey, if China invades Taiwan, we will come to Taiwan's defense. And I think it's important to understand that we are seeing the development of a model in Ukraine that certainly applies to Taiwan as well. Are we likely to land Marines on the shores of Taiwan to defend Taiwan's speeches from a Chinese invasion? That's the least likely scenario. But are we going to accelerate military support to Taiwan to give it the best chance to defend itself in the event of a Chinese incursion? Yes, that's the model that we're testing in Ukraine. Will it be as successful as we've seen in Ukraine? That's a really good question. Every time you run a war game, Taiwan loses. Is that right? When you game it out, Taiwan is always the loser. When you game it out, China's growing military weight at some point overwhelms Taiwan. But I think this is also cautionary to say to Beijing, look, you may succeed. But then again, if we start to do with respect to sanctions and other things that interrupts China's economic performance, which is critical to its political governorship, this could go badly for you. In that sense, yes, there is ambiguity and that tends to work in the context of China and Taiwan because ultimately Beijing, if it decides to do something meaningful, it wants to be a short of success. And that's not something that they can necessarily be confident in. I have to say, if anyone had ever forgotten that you Philip Crowley were once a spokesperson and a diplomat, your reference there to Joe Biden sometimes speaking from the heart when others might say he had perhaps misspoken, but instead it's speaking from the heart. True to your credentials as a spokesperson and diplomat. Now, as we said at the top, Philip Crowley, it has been a really big week for foreign policy. In fact, the visit to Taiwan that you and I have been talking about managed to overshadow what I'm sure everyone in the Joe Biden White House would have hoped would be the big story of the week. And that is that on Monday night in Washington, D.C., President Biden was able to announce in a live televised address from the White House that a U.S. drone strike in Afghanistan had killed the Al-Qaeda leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri. People around the world no longer need to fear the vicious and determined killer. The United States continues to demonstrate our resolve and our capacity to defend the American people against those who seek to do us harm. As far as we know, there were no casualties there, certainly no long term presence required for American troops in Kabul to or even short term to pull this off. But just take us into the mind of the military planners and the president himself. Why go after this target and this target now? Simply because we found out where he was. This has been a quest going back 20 years. And it's been over 10 years since Bin Laden was killed and multiple presidents have said, if we find these guys and they're threatening the United States, and they are, we will take them out. And it was it's meaningful for Joe Biden to be able to stand there and said, we promised that we'd find you. We did. And we will continue to do this as long as as you threaten the United States. Obviously, the political complication for President Biden is that, yes, we found him, but we found him in the center of Kabul. And just a year ago, when announcing the withdrawal of American troops, you know, he had said that, you know, Al Qaeda is no longer in Afghanistan in a meaningful way. So it is an affirmation of the of the administration's counterterrorism strategy that you don't need thousands of troops on the ground anywhere to make meaningful progress in the what we call the war on terror. But but obviously it is a reminder that the president's Afghan withdrawal is not necessarily unfolded as he anticipated because the success of 2022 in some ways only draws attention to the failure of 2021, the two Augusts there, because what's happened now shows that there was a price to be paid for leaving Kabul in the sense that someone like Zawahiri could find a new base in Afghanistan. Well, I mean, it's a it's a complicated issue. And complexity doesn't always play as you anticipate when it comes to politics. But I mean, Joe Biden was right that we were we found ourselves in Afghanistan not fighting Al Qaeda directly. We found ourselves in the middle of an Afghan civil war, and one that we couldn't obviously could not influence. We could not adequately protect the existing Afghan government, nor could we adequately prevent the the dramatic Taliban move to Kabul just over a year ago. But obviously, while it was successful, it was chaotic. And the the scenes of airplanes taking off with people running down the runway is one of those enduring images that it never leaves you. And do you think it's the memory of those images of the chaos of August 2021, which accounts for the fact that there has been much less media coverage and sort of impact in some ways, you know, jubilation in America domestically, little fanfare this time compared to that announcement from Barack Obama about announcing the death of Bin Laden in 2011? Or is there more to it than that? Well, a lot has happened since 9 11. 20 years ago, Al Qaeda was the magic brand, right? 20 years later, it's the Islamic State or some offshoot of it. Yes, it's a global brand, global movement in a broad sense. But but the threats in many respects regarding these kinds of groups is now far more local than global. People have seen that things in Afghanistan themselves have either not improved or gone backward. I'm thinking of women's rights to education, their role in public life, the rise of extreme poverty. The Taliban is also being hit hard by the dire conditions. Many of them haven't been paid since they took control of the country last year. A takeover that halted international aid that once poured into Afghanistan, tipping the country into economic freefall. Does all of that just add to even after the sort of sugar rush of people Americans delight in seeing the back of Al-Zawahiri, once that's faded, does all of that too, alongside the chaos, those reports of deep trouble in Afghanistan again, undermine Joe Biden, because it suggests this thing was a failure. I don't think it does. I mean, notwithstanding the chaos, the American people have broadly supported the president's decision, which obviously was just implementing an agreement that had been negotiated by the Trump administration. The president has taken some political hit for the way in which the withdrawal proceeded. He has not actually taken any political hit for the decision to leave. I think this is a major problem for the Taliban, because they signed an agreement saying we're not going to allow Afghanistan to be a haven for terrorists who could threaten the United States and its allies. And yet, if we find a year later, here's the Wahiri. That's a real problem for the Taliban as they seek to find a way to establish a sustainable relationship with the international community. I'm trying to work out how one should read then this week, whether this is a demonstration of strength by the Americans. Nancy Pelosi did not back down. She went to Taiwan. And yes, this high value target being struck by the Americans. Is this a big lift for the Biden administration? Or does one, the Afghanistan thing, just draw attention to the underlying problems there? And maybe the other, China, just is actually storing up problems further down the road, even perhaps exacerbating problems. How should we read the week for Joe Biden on foreign policy? Oh, it's been an excellent week for Joe Biden on foreign policy and a pretty good week for Joe Biden on domestic policy as well. I think probably if this were 2024, you'd have real momentum, assuming Joe Biden is running for reelection as he says he is. This would provide great momentum. It is unusual for foreign policy to have a profound impact on American politics. The economy will be much more a decisive issue, the Supreme Court as well. But the problem for Joe Biden is this is 2022 and we're approaching midterms. So the presidents will get some lift out of this, how that translates in terms of races for the House of Representatives and the Senate. That's an indirect benefit. That's a little bit harder to calculate. I'm glad you've got us to domestic politics. And I know this is, as you said before, it is one of the three big competitions that you focus on. We like on this podcast to ask a what else question, something completely different to the rest of our conversation. Your book refers to its title, refers to America's fractured politics, and few issues are more fracturing, more polarizing than abortion. This week, I think it caused some surprise. The very conservative state of Kansas had a vote on abortion rights. And though voters in Kansas rejected a constitutional amendment that would have given state lawmakers the chance to either further restrict or ban abortions in the state, all this coming after that Supreme Court decision to overturn Roe versus Wade. Joe Biden himself signed an executive order that aims to protect abortion rights more. What's your read of how this will play out in the autumn? Our pro-choice advocates are Democrats right to take some cheer from that Kansas vote and think that this issue, abortion rights and the Supreme Court decision, might actually motivate and galvanize voters to upend expectations of big Republican wins and perhaps deliver a bluer verdict better for the Democrats in the autumn. Well, it's a very interesting case. And you know, there was a book 10 or 15 years ago, what's happened, what's happening in Kansas? What's the matter with Kansas? It was good. What's the matter with Kansas? And so it documented the shift from a state that was conservative and yet balanced politically to one that became for a period of time, one of the more red states in America. And now perhaps you've seen it hit the far wall and starting to to carry him back. It is a fascinating movement, how they did it. And I'm sure in other states where you've got now with the Supreme Court decision, the battles move to individual states and how they're going to define what's legal, what's not. You've got the issue of whether somebody in one state can travel to another state. You know, this is going to play out very dramatically over the next few months and the next two years. And this is, I'm sure, you know, for those on the Democratic side, this is very encouraging and something they're going to copy in other instances. Philip Crowley, thanks so much for joining me on the podcast this week. Always a pleasure. And that's all from me for this week. There'll be a link so that you can find Philip's book on the description page for today's episode. That book, Red Line, American Foreign Policy in a Time of Fractured Politics and Failing States. Listen up next week as our sister podcast today in focus will be speaking to Jason Burke and Emma Graham Harrison about the ramifications for Afghanistan of the alzawahiri killing. My terrific colleague, Joni Greve, will be holding the fort. She'll be in the chair for the next couple of weeks. So do make sure to tune in for that. But for now, it is goodbye. The producer was Danielle Stevens, the executive producer, Maz Eptahaj. I'm Jonathan Friedland. Thanks, as always, for listening. This is The Guardian.