 This is The Guardian. Something a bit different this week. Imagine that it's 2024. As America goes to the polls, democracy itself is on the brink. Who will take the White House? And at what cost? I'm outside the Old Vic Theatre in London for the new play The 47th, which asks precisely those questions, offering a dramatic glimpse into the next presidential race. So what is it that draws artists and writers to American politics again and again? From the West Wing to House of Cards, Pennsylvania Avenue is a perennial setting. Why? What light can theatre shed on the 2024 campaign that news coverage can't? I'm Jonathan Friedland, Guardian Colonist, and this is Politics Weekly America. In this election, we have a chance to change the course of history. I've caused it. Now more than ever... We will make America proud again. We choose truth to tell it, Terry, just over facts. I'm compassionate. I've got to go do... The world is... It's the morning after the night I saw Mike Bartlett's hugely exciting and thought-provoking new play The 47th. And here to talk about it, I'm delighted to say that Mike Bartlett joins me in the studio. Mike, it's very good to have you on Politics Weekly America. So let's just say something about what the sort of setup is. It is 2024, as we've said. There is a race for the White House going on, the race to be The 47th president of the United States, Joe Biden, currently obviously the 46th. And there is a race on the Republican side to be the candidate, Donald Trump still sulking around, brooding around, wanting to come back in to politics. And then on the other side, you have this interesting moment where Joe Biden, an old and sort of faded Joe Biden, hands the baton instead to his deputy, Kamala Harris, for her to be the candidate. And those are the two that backdrop the context of the play. It's a kind of rolling January the 6th. There is, every day is January the 6th in the play. There is trouble going on across the country. It's not just in Washington, in all the different states, there are crowds. And you even have the figure of the sort of horned, shaman figure who appeared in the well of the Senate. On January the 6th, you have somebody who looks like that on stage sort of symbolically with all these protesters. Those of us who are in the political commentary field got out of the prediction business after 2016, partly because of what happened in America with Donald Trump's election, but also Britain and Brexit. And we just said, right, we're never going to do that again. So I have to ask right from the start before we get into some of the specifics, to what extent is this a prediction by you of where is this your best guess of where you think it's going? It's an imaginative prediction. So I think what I'm trying to get at and what a theatre piece can do is to try and get in the psychology. And whether that's the psychology of people that vote for Trump, whether it's inside the psychology of Trump, or indeed the psychology of those on the left trying to win and stop it, it's trying to genuinely get inside those ideas, match them with an emotive sense of identity, mix all that up as you can in the theatre and then, yeah, push it into the future and go, where does that leave us? Rather than it being a sort of more journalistic look into the future, because I think as an artist, that's your role. There are many opinion pieces about a potential for a new civil war. When I spoke to journalists about this, they, quite a few of them said, well, but it won't be guns and people on the street and all of that. But as an artist, I sort of went, well, we have seen guns and people on the street breaking into the capital. That looked like a scene from another country or from a Shakespeare play. And I think the role of the artist is to provocatively try and imagine the unimaginable before it happens. You know, it's one of the roles of the artist. And so that's what I'm trying to do, even if it seems unlikely or unimaginable. I mean, it's been very important to me that there's a line that Carmilla says to Trump, which is she describes what he would do if he did get power again. And basically describes a scenario where he consolidates power, he gets a third term, he becomes like a dictator. He calls her a fantasist and she says, no, everything I've said comes from your mouth. And for me, that was the rule on the play, is that although you might watch the play and go, this is extreme, all the things that Trump does in the play, every single one of them is an idea that Trump has said or said he wants or has talked about his own family or talked about the dictators that he admires. And he has talked about the ending term limits and going on and on and on and being president for life. All of those things, you've gone for the Margaret Atwood rule that she made sure there was nothing in the handmaid's tale that hasn't happened somewhere and you've done something similar. And I noticed that reference to everything's come from you. You were telling the audience that too at that point. I mean, that question is fascinating to me that you spoke to journalists about civil war, because some really sober minded people in America have asked that question. The writer David French, for example, talked about a possible secession. Is it your view and I absolutely take your point about it's imaginative and it's not literal, but that January 6 isn't a one off event in the recent past, but is a harbinger of what's coming in the future? Yeah, I think that's right. And I think there are lots of sort of reasons for that. But I wrote a previous play called King Charles III, which in a way was about the unfinished legacy of the English Civil War. And I think this is almost about the unfinished legacy of the American Civil War. It feels to me like as social media pulls us apart, as different ideas pull us apart, that the idea behind America that can pull all those completely different states together, all those completely different people together, does seem to be falling apart. And the vested interests in each state are losing any reason to be federal and far more looking for their own interests or in the states. You've got states trying to set up a state guard on one hand, you've got people calling for a Christian nation, which are fundamentally against the idea of the United States of America. We haven't seen things like this before or not for a good long time. So I suppose the play is sort of looking at those clues and saying, really, I suppose what I was trying to do in the place, to go, what is the answer to that? If you believe in America and you believe that there's something of value to hold these states together and to try and keep this country together and this project together, what's the answer to the people who are trying to pull it apart or construct interests for one particular group against another? I think more broadly, it feels a time where we are being separated into different silos and being encouraged through social media to get more angry and to define our identity in quite a narrow way and then and then either defend it or attack it on other people. And all these things, there are lots of potentially good reasons for this politically, but I think overall, there's a huge danger that things fall apart. And when things are falling apart, countries tend to look for strong men, leaders who offer certainty, even though that certainty is completely false and is to do with their own desires and interests. And I don't feel that at the moment the left in America, particularly or indeed in this country, have got an answer to that. There's a speech in the play about Trump saying, how would I defeat myself? And one of the things he says is that when Hillary ran, nobody knew. He could say five things that Trump wanted and you couldn't say anything that Hillary wanted. I think it's from the very same exchange where he says, go on, what's your, what do you stand for? He says to Carmilla Harris. And she comes up with his answer that involves the words legislation and mechanism. And he comes right, he says, I'm bored already after she said about five or six words. And I thought there you were making a point. We've actually talked about on this podcast before about political language and how the left, center left Democrats just constantly get into this abstract, dry language where the right use much planar vocabulary, much more colloquial, much more popular and tell stories. Whereas the left come up with policies and abstract nouns and statistics. And I just thought in that little exchange, I felt that was a bit of you for telling us this is one of your sort of hobby horses that you think the left get it, get it wrong on political language and the right are just a bit better at it. Yeah. And I don't know what I think about that because I think the other thing the right do is they entertain. They know that to get clicks, to get attention, you've got to be funny, you've got to be provocative and they've really got nothing to lose. They don't seem to, I'm trying to not be biased on this, but they don't seem to have any sort of moral or ethical bar below which they will say Trump, it seems as he says, he could shoot someone and he'd still be elected president. So he's literally saying it's not about ethics and morals. It's about effect and business and power. And, and for him, entertainment, by all accounts, his team would just be waiting when he stood on the stump to see what he would announce because he would announce something simply because he felt he was losing the crowd for 30 seconds. This notion of entertainment is not just gloss or showbiz on top of politics and power. It's becoming the politics and power because the currency is our interest and our clicks and what we're fascinated by online and what we're drawn to. I'm not quite sure how we get out of this. And again, that's why I write plays because I don't know the answers to these questions, but I think, you know, we have it in this country, but America is, it's that writ large and it strikes terror into me about what the consequences of that, when you apply that sort of populist thinking that has driven dictators and strong men across history. And then you fuel it with social media phones and a deliberate dilution of truth and verifiable fact. Just on some of the specifics about Carmilla Harris, you depict her as this very wise, strong figure of great moral integrity in the play, you know, with complications, but broadly. And yet again, we've talked about it on this podcast, people are quite disappointed in Carmilla Harris. They feel she hasn't been, I don't know, not that she's falling short in terms of moral standing, particularly, but just not not that present, not that great. You know, there are clips that are shared of her being kind of faltering and stuttering on some of the big questions about Ukraine and other things. Your Carmilla Harris is a more admirable figure, perhaps than the real one. Well, I know I think she maybe becomes that in the play or it's sort of thrust upon her. She talks as a soliloquy about her being like an understudy, but she has to sit in the dressing room and watch someone doing what she could do. And the very nature of doing that has mean she's lost her nerve, which is the end of that soliloquy. I used to think it was more than just a deputy or a prosecutor. Now I'm not so sure. And I think that's trying to reflect the thing you're talking about, which is that maybe through being in that role of vice president, which I think a lot of people would say is a very thankless task. And it's like name the superhero vice president. And it's quite hard to do that. Because the whole point of it is that you don't succeed more than the president. So I think that's tough. But in a way, as a dramatist, she's an ideal person. You know, you wouldn't want the person that the president sees thrust upon to be completely ready and brilliant. You want it to be someone who has slightly lost their nerve and isn't sure how to step up to the situation. And I think that's so she's a good protagonist for me to ask the question, how on earth do you defeat Trumpian populism? Because she hasn't got an answer. But she tries, you know, she tries going very hard line with him like a prosecutor using the law. She considers doing things that are maybe not so lawful. But in the end, what she has left is, as we talked about earlier in the conversation is her ideals is what is America? And if at what point do you if you cross the line, do you not really have a you don't have those ideals, you don't have that country left. So she's there to sort of unpack that. And I think although I agree, she's she seemed to be a bit wanting even back in the debates that you know, I think she didn't. She did as well. She did try to run for president. That's what I mean. In the Joe Biden year. And she did. I think she pulled out the race before a single vote was cast. She didn't she quit before even the New Hampshire primary, because she didn't get much support. So people have admired her, but they weren't really ready to, yeah, to vote for it. But you took that a step further, which I thought was interesting. You've made it a whole, you know, a series of literary choices, dramatic choices, but they end up being political choices. So they're interesting. I should also say to people listening, the reason partly why I'm taking very seriously what Mike Bartlett predicts is because in King Charles III, with a slightly uncanny, I think you have the Prince Harry figure starts dating a mixed race woman, and eventually wants to leave the country, I think with her, you wrote that before any of that had happened before any of us had heard of Meghan Markle. And so you know, there's a reason why people might listen quite closely to the dramatic choices you make, because you've got a bit of a track record when it comes to looking into the future. One of the things you suggest is that Kamala Harris's antagonist, on the other side, yes, Donald Trump, but also one of his children, and you have a kind of nod to King Lear, where he's going to decide who his heir is. And of the three children, it's Ivanka who emerges as a major figure in the play. I would guess if we were talking to, you know, journalists in America right now, they would say if there was a going to be a political heir to the Trump dynasty, it would more likely be Don Jr, who is more active on Twitter and all that kind of thing, and seems to have that sort of taste for the populist jugular that his father has. But you land with Ivanka, I mean, almost putting aside the dramatically, because I can see why having a woman as an antagonist for Kamala would be quite appealing. But politically, do you think of the three of them, she's actually the one who might be the strongest? I think there's two things. I think firstly, she was considered as a vice presidential candidate, apparently, the first time around that was considered that he did think that might be a good idea. So clearly, and I think he would love that I think if he thought he could swing it. So there was loving the bumper stickers in Trump Trump Trump Trump, exactly. It's ideal. It's an and also I think the sort of feel of it. So partly, it's who does he consider his heir to be? And also he's so savvy about winning. I honestly thought if he looked at his children, which three is that could actually win this? You know, if they ran or if they were the running mate, I think he would think Ivanka straight away. And I agree, I don't think Don Junior has a hope. But I think Ivanka could I think she could inherit. I think Don Junior feels like a bit of a fool. He feels like a bit of a sort of playboy and an idiot and not got his father's savvy. I think Ivanka has preserved a sort of gloss and a slightly unknowability. It's a mystique, mystique, like her and Jared. And then there's these articles about them living trying to live a sort of quiet life in a Florida suburb. And it's a great depiction to them. In a way, that's the sort of gesture of the play is not so much to go generalistically, who looks like the most likely. But what would Trump who would Trump want his heir to be? And what would that heir look like? And actually, is there a form of Trumpism that could be more dangerous in the future, because it would be both take his base and then be more palatable to the center ground? Because she does even in the play, but certainly in real life to smooths off those sort of rough edges, she can seem softer. She, for example, is not all in with the January the sixth style civil protests in the play, and violence. And so you can imagine her being the kind of acceptable face of Trumpism. And apparently, that's what she was doing in real life is texting him going, you've got to call them off. Yeah. And then she's going to be the kind of person who you can call them and you can call them. And so I think that's really important. And, and at various points, you know, I'd certainly I don't know whether those were leaks that whether that's the story she wanted to get out that she was the sort of person the more civilized person holding her father back. I don't know when he was in office. But that's certainly the impression that that came out. So whether that's true, or whether that's what she's trying to construct, I find all that fascinating. I think that's really so she's a I in politics, you have this device on the stage. Quite often people bring out their phones, and film each other and you have a live image of whatever they're seeing. And that happens enough times for me to feel you're saying something important there that we are to notice. And you mentioned earlier on our conversation about phones. I mean, how much has the the phone and the, you know, the handheld camera and the social media platforms, where those videos are then posted, how much have they changed US politics? What do you think has happened there? Is it a profound change? Or are the sort of underpinnings of politics still the same as they were where you have a kind of warring and ambitious dynasty as you did in Shakespeare's day? Because in a way both elements are in your play. Yeah, well I think they've changed. I mean someone said we shouldn't call it a phone. To call it a phone is to reduce it. It's something far more, let's like plugged into our brains. And it's affecting the way we think and the way we behave and our access to information. So I think if you think about the power of it, just on a personal basis, it's gonna have a massive impact on politics. If it was a democratic thing, if it was like the initial dream of the internet where we could all get access to free information and there was a genuine market of information, even if it was that, then I think maybe it would reflect the old school politics and a sort of democracy and ideas and whatever the best ideas would come to the top. But I don't feel like that's what's happening. I feel like it's become a place where big interests, whether that's social media companies or big political funders can use the platforms to affect what information goes to what people and can do it in an incredibly targeted way. People who listen to this will completely be aware of all this stuff. But even like I always think of Durham Brown, how he would put subliminal messages in to make someone think something. And this is happening all the time and we know that they can do that so that what the articles you encounter, the facts you see, completely sway you towards a way of thinking. So this idea of brainwashing is not a sort of fantasy. It's absolutely going on. And in that world, it feels like the possibility of being able to sway huge groups of people towards causes that they both feel incredibly emotional about. That's the other thing is that politics is not like, it's becoming not just like a segment on a trivial pursuit. You've got politics and you've got religion and you've got science or whatever. It's becoming everything. It's becoming who you are. And if you are not this, then you are nothing for a lot of people because it's emotive, it's my identity, it's everything that I believe in. And that being the case, it's expressed on your phone all the time. It's how you feel you've got a voice. It's where you get your information. It's how you think, it's how you argue. That's gonna affect everything. And I do think the right has embraced it. And I think the left is still trying to play politics. The old way. The old way. And for whatever reason, they are struggling to embrace the new technology, which is odd because you would think potentially given the ideas of progress and conservatism, it would be the other way around, but it hasn't been. Yeah, and with younger people often, predominantly on the progressive side of politics, you would think so. And yet you're saying they're lagging behind. Talking of age, let's just close out with a couple of questions about specific protagonists. Joe Biden, is the real Joe Biden as frail and as weak as your play depicts? Well, something happens to him in the play that makes him more weak and frail. I think, but I think, I suppose what it reflects is that whether or not he was gonna run a second term, everyone would be saying now, he's definitely gonna run a second term. I can't see it happening. I mean, all I'd say is if he does run for a second term, that says something about the Democrats. That they haven't got anyone else. And I think that in itself is sends a pretty weak message, which I think is the interesting thing beyond his current physical capacity about whether there's anything wrong with him. I think in a way, that's less the issue than what's gonna happen the next time. So, all right, on the other side, you said your gut is that it's gonna be Trump. I have to say that if there was a gun to my head and I had to say, I would say the same thing. You have that scene in the play where Trump almost offers to say how, some advice on how to take him on. This is what I would do to beat me because he's so confident in a way that he understands the political game better than anyone else. You've taken such a good hard look at him, his rhetoric, his brain, his tactics. Having gone so deep into it, what's your answer to that challenge yourself? If the Democrats picked up the phone and said, okay, you're the Trump whisperer in a way, you understand this guy, what is the way to take him on in 2024? How do you hit his weak spot? I mean, I suspect, and this is not easy, but I suspect you need to find the person in the presidential system. You need an equivalent to like Blair, basically. You need someone who can be entertaining, is incredibly presentable, very bright, can make a case. One of the things Blair was very good at is dissecting ludicrous answers on the other side and doing it in a way that was intelligible. But also he understood to tap into a sense of history and identity. I feel like that's, if the Democrats could find someone that was witty, that was entertaining, but that was also truthful and meant what they said. I mean, this doesn't sound like it should be such a high bar, but I think it is, I can't see. Have you seen any Democrat here? I mean, certainly when I looked, no, not at all. I remember when John Kerry ran, I literally switched on the television. I'd not seen him before. I switched on the television, looked at John Kerry and went, he's gonna lose within a minute. Seconds, yeah. And I think that's the problem with the Democrats. Why did you, in his case, why, what did you see in a few seconds? His manner. It's like that thin slicing thing. Underestimate that at your peril, that people make a judgment within 30 seconds and it will stick. In a way, that's what I think the Democrats try and need to find is someone who, when you switch them on, you wanna keep the TV on. You wanna keep looking at them on your phone. You're really interested in what they've got to say, rather than just someone who's competent or the best of a bad field. And Trump has that in spades, right? By the bucketful. There's something mesmerizing. Do the Democrats need a Donald Trump? I mean, unless you change the entire culture, you need someone who is a great presenter, someone who's fascinating, who's interesting, who's funny. It's not a culture that I particularly like that that's the fact of what we need, but I think unless you're gonna change the entire culture, I think that is what you need. We always ask our guests on Politics Weekly America a what else question? But I thought, I've just put this to you because it just stopped me as being a line you could almost imagine from your play. Fiona Hill, the British born advisor to past presidents who sat on the National Security Council and is a Russia expert, has been quoted in a new magazine article in the New York Times talking about Trump's mishandling of Russia and Ukraine policy when he was president. Donald Trump's reply when this was put to him to the New York Times was, she doesn't know the first thing she's talking about. If she didn't have the accent, she would be nothing. How Donald Trump is there? Yeah, well, that's, yeah. And it's a woman again, isn't it? I think as well. His attitude towards women is sort of despicable and awful, this sort of Saturday Night Live version of him is broad and as though he doesn't know what he's doing, he knows exactly what he's doing. His phrasing and the way he comes at subjects left field, in deliberately insulting people like that and like you've just described, it's incredibly sophisticated the way he talks and the way he carries attention. It's instinctive, but also it's crafted. He spent a long time talking like this in public. In a way, part of the purpose of the play is to take comments like that and take the way he operates and frame it. There's a sort of Brechtian idea of Veframdung effect, which is that you take something that people see as just the life and normal and you put it on stage, you put a frame around it, and then when you see it again in real life, you can analyze it in a different way and you can see the mechanics underneath it. And I think that's what I sort of hope to do with Donald Trump is to mean that when you see him again, you almost see the tactics that are going on there and that somehow drains him of a bit of power. That would be great if I could do that. The play is the 47th. It is playing now at the Old Vic and the author is Mike Bartlett. Mike Bartlett, thanks so much for coming on Politics Weekly America. Great, thank you. And that is all from me for this week. As you heard, Mike Bartlett and I were talking a lot about distrust in politics and that is a bit of a theme for both this week's Politics Weekly UK and for Thursday's edition of the Today in Focus podcast where Noshin Iqbal and I spoke about the latest twist in the so-called Partygate scandal. So do have a listen to both of those. My thanks again to Mike Bartlett for joining me in the studio. The 47th is at the Old Vic Theatre in London until the 28th of May. This week's producer was Ian Chambers, the executive producer, Nicole Jackson. I'm Jonathan Friedland and thanks as always for listening. This is The Guardian.