 Civics 101 is supported in part by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. When we did our declaration episode last year, Hannah, author and Harvard professor Daniel Allen told us the document was a masterclass in political philosophy unto itself, that you can hear pro-slavery and anti-slavery voices in it. And then there was something that we didn't talk about in the episode. In a recent interview on Vox, she said, one of the big things we get wrong when we talk about the Declaration is that we think it was written entirely by Thomas Jefferson. He put on his tombstone author, Declaration of Independence, and that was a real self-aggrandizing gesture. In fact, he was the scribe. The intellectual work of the Declaration was driven significantly by John Adams and Benjamin Franklin. That's an important thing to say out loud because Adams is somebody who never owned slaves, and Franklin was somebody who wasn't enslaver earlier in his life and who repudiated enslavement and in fact became a proactive, vocal advocate of abolition. And when we spoke with Danielle, she noted this, that there are pro-slavery and anti-slavery voices in the Declaration. But then she followed up that there is one community that shared no such duality. You can't say the same thing about the treatment of Native Americans. You can't see a moment of sort of positivity in the Declaration on that front. This is really, for me, the worst moment in the Declaration. The one piece of the Declaration that still, I think, really hurts. I'm Nick Capodice. I'm Hannah McCarthy. And this is Civics 101, the podcast refresher course on the basics of how our democracy works. Today is our second revisit to our founding document. We wanted to focus on that particular grievance and its social and political reverberations. I spoke with author, activist and independent candidate for president, Mark Charles, and I'll let him introduce himself. Yeah. So, uh, yeah, Mark Charles. Yeah. Sin bikkeh dineh, nishle, do toi haglini bachas chin. Sin bikkeh dineh das chej, do toru cidni das cineh. In our novel culture, when we introduce ourselves, we always give our four clans. We're matrilineal as a people and our identities come from our mother's mother. So my mother's mother is American of Dutch heritage. And that's why I say sin bikkeh dineh. Loosely translated, that means I'm from the wooden shoe people. My second clan, my father's mother is toi haglini, which is the waters that flow together. My third clan, my mother's father is also sin bikkeh dineh. And then my fourth clan, my father's father is toi haglini. That's the bitter water clan. It's one of the original clans of our Navajo people. That's really interesting because, you know, whenever we introduce ourselves, like even at the beginning of each podcast, we say our first name and our last name and leave it at that. But the Navajo introduction roots oneself in the lands and the people that are a part of you. It's an active form of self-identifying. I also just want to acknowledge that I am speaking to you today from Washington, D.C. And Washington, D.C. is the traditional land of the Piscataway. The Piscataway are the native nation. They lived here. They hunted here. They farmed here. They fished here. They raised their families here. They buried their dead here. Their society was here. And this was the nation that was removed from these lands. And when these lands were colonized. So they were here long before Columbus got lost at sea. And then they removed from these lands. So the District of Columbia, the state of Maryland, the state of Virginia could be established. I like to acknowledge the people whose land I'm on, no matter where I go around the country. So everywhere I speak, when I travel, I always acknowledge the host people of the land. And I want to acknowledge today the Piscataway. And I want to thank them publicly for their stewardship of these lands. And I want to thank them for the honor of living, of being on their lands today. I called Mark to talk about the Declaration, but he said first we had to go back to another set of documents from about 300 years earlier, which created a concept of international law called the Doctrine of Discovery. To be honest, I actually haven't heard of that. And I'm a little abashed because we did an entire series on the founding documents. What is the Doctrine of Discovery? The Doctrine of Discovery is a series of Papal Bulls, their edicts of the Catholic Church, written between 1452 and 1493. They say things like invade, search out, capture, vanquish, and subdue all Saracens and Pagans whatsoever, reduce their persons to perpetual slavery, convert them to his and to their use and profit. That quote is from the Papal Bull, Dumb Diversis in 1452. A Papal Bull, by the way, is a public decree or a charter that's issued by the Pope and Dumb Diversis was issued in 1452 by Pope Nicholas V. So the Doctrine of Discovery, it's essentially the church in Europe, saying to the nations of Europe, wherever you go, whatever lands you find, they're not ruled by white European Christian rulers. Those people are subhuman and their land is yours for the taking. So this is literally the doctrine that let European nations go into Africa, colonize the continent and enslave the people because they didn't believe them to be human. It's the same doctrine that allowed Columbus who was lost at sea to land in this new world, which was already inhabited by millions and claimed to have discovered it. If you think about it, you cannot discover lands already inhabited. It's called stealing. It's called conquering, called colonizing. The fact that our history books, our monuments, our proclamations refer to Columbus as the discoverer of America. This reveals the implicit racial bias of the nation, which is that native people specifically and people of color in general are not fully human. And I would guess, right, that the dehumanization of non-whites results in a drastic expansion of the church's power across the whole world. So how is this idea of enslavement and the taking of land tied to the Declaration of Independence? Mark wanted to mention one more step before 1776. It's a proclamation of King George III given to the 13 colonies in 1763. In this proclamation, one of the things he did was he essentially drew a line down the Appalachian Mountains. And he said to the colonies that were here that they no longer have the right of discovery of the empty Indian lands west of Appalachia. That right, he said, belonged to the crown, not to the colonists. Now, this is where there was a break between the northern colonies up where Canada is and the southern colonies, which were the 13 of the US, where the northern colonies accepted the proclamation of 1763. Didn't change the history. The lands were still discovered. They were just discovered by the crown, not the colonies. 1763 is also the year of the end of the French and Indian War, also known as the Seven Years War. And that's when what became Canada changed from French hands to British control. And this proclamation actually started to set up guidance on how to protect indigenous rights to the land. It's a huge factor in Canadian land rights even to this day. But the southern colonies and by the way, the southern colonies, the and when I say southern, I mean all of the 13 colonies that eventually became the United States, they rejected this. They wanted that land for themselves. They wanted that right of discovery. And so they made an official complaint. So a few years later, they write a letter of protest in their letter of protest. They have a list of grievances against the king. One of the grievances is that he's raising the level of conditions for new appropriations of land. The other grievance, this is one of their last grievances, is that he's endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose only known rule of warfare is the complete destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions. It's literally this is the Declaration of Independence. I have thought of the Declaration as an announcement of separation, a justification for revolution. But I'd never considered it as a letter of protest. The grievances, frankly, get short shrift when we examine the document, but they are all tied to very specific frustrations with England, with the king. And those two paired together embed this racist doctrine of discovery into our very founding. So 30 lines below the statement, I'm in a created equal. The Declaration of Independence refers to natives as savages, making it very clear that the founding fathers use this inclusive term on men merely because they had a very narrow definition of who was actually human. So this makes the Declaration of Independence a blatant, systemically white supremacist document. And it's not just the ethical problem of considering a whole people as savages. The doctrine of discovery becomes embedded into American law. In 1823, the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Johnson versus Macintosh. And it's two men of European descent. They're litigating over a single piece of land. One of them got the land, acquired the land from a tribe. The other one acquired the same land from the government. They want to know who owned it. So the case goes all the way to the Supreme Court. So the Supreme Court, this is John Marshall's court. He was the chief justice at the time. They had to decide the principle that land titles were based on. They ruled that the principle was that discovery gave title to the land. And then they referenced the doctrine of discovery. And John Marshall actually wrote, he said, but the Indians who inhabited these lands were fierce savages, whose subsistence came chiefly from the forest. To leave them in possession of their own country was to leave the country a wilderness. This is in the, in the opinion he wrote in Johnson versus Macintosh. So literally the conclusion of this opinion is that title is based on discovery. And natives, even though we were here first, but because we're savages, we are merely occupants of the land, like a fish occupies water, a bird occupies air. Meanwhile, Europeans who have the right of discovery to the land, the fee title to it, they're the true title holders. So that case back in 1823 creates the legal precedent for land titles based on this understanding that natives are savages. How long did that Supreme Court precedent remain? That land titles are based on, quote, discovery. That decision, Marshall's decision was cited in 1954, 1985, and most recently 2005. Are you kidding? What was the 2005 case? It was the city of Cheryl versus the Oneida Indian nation of New York. To take it back at the time of our founding, the Oneida Indian nation owned about 6 million acres of land, which the George Washington administration reduced to a few hundred thousand and set aside as a reservation. The Oneida sold much of that land to New York state over the next 200 years. So in the 1990s, the Oneida Indian nation came back to the state of New York and they purchased some of their traditional lands on the open market. They paid full price for them and they wanted to reestablish some of their traditional sovereignty over these lands. Now the lands they bought were within the city limits of the city of Cheryl. And if they had sovereignty over them, it meant they wouldn't pay taxes on them. The city of Cheryl wanted their tax revenue. So they sued the Oneida Indian nation in federal district court. The case went to the Supreme court in 2004. And in 2005, the opinion was written in the first footnote of the case. The court references the doctrine of discovery by name. They then go on to establish that because these lands were settled by white people, that there was no precedent for giving the land back. They then go on and they build the argument that these lands have since been converted from wilderness to become parts of city like Cheryl. They used that exact word, wilderness. They did. They are reiterating the exact words of Justice Marshall. So the court in 2005 is making the exact same argument. It's just not yet. The court in 2005 is making the exact same argument. It's just not using the word savages, but it's making the same argument. And so then they conclude that the Oneida Indian nation cannot rekindle embers of sovereignty that have long ago grown cold. It's one of the most white supremacist Supreme Court opinion in my lifetime. And that opinion was written by Ruth Bader Ginsburg. But given the extraordinary passage of time, the Oneida's long delay in seeking equitable relief in court against New York or its local units and developments in the city of Cheryl spanning several generations, we reject the piecemeal shift in governance. And you ask yourself, how can this happen? Well, our nation is literally having a debate about systemic institutionalized white supremacy, and we're calling out these racist symbols and we're making some even big changes. And yet we still celebrate this document that literally calls the native savages. Mark told me the reason he wants to have a national conversation about this is that when we talk about institutional racism and white supremacy, we don't just deal with the low hanging fruit. Right. The low hanging fruit is Andrew Jackson. Most Americans can agree he was a problem. We have to deal with him. The low hanging fruit is the Confederate flag and General Lee, you know, most people can agree. Yeah, they didn't represent the best of America. The low hanging fruit is Christopher Columbus. Yes, he was pretty vile person who who way overstepped his bounds of what he should have done. That's the low hanging fruit. And yeah, we can all agree those are not good pieces of our history and our legacy to deal with. But because we're dealing with systemic. Racism and institutionalized white supremacy, we also have to realize that's going to affect the core of who we are. So we have to also look at what's at the center. Abraham Lincoln, who was a blatant white supremacist and literally committed genocide against native peoples in the states of Minnesota, Colorado and New Mexico, including my own people, the Navajo in the long walk. We have to look at the Declaration of Independence. The Declaration of Independence is the value statements for our nation. And what I'm saying is until we have a foundation that actually allows for the humanity of everybody, our laws are never going to reflect that. If you have a house that's built on a bad foundation, you're going to have cracks in your walls, you're going to have gaps in your windowsills, you're going to have a creaky crooked floor. Now you can paint your walls all you want. You can cock your windows as much as you want. You can new carpet your your floor every every summer. But until you fix the foundation, you're never going to fix the house. And so this is where a new law isn't going to solve these problems. We have to deal with the foundation. And so I propose that let's remove the racism, the sexism and the white supremacy from our foundations. That's two out of three declaration responses. The third will be in a couple of weeks. Today's episode is produced by me Nick Cappadice with you Hannah McCarthy. Thank you. Our staff includes Jackie Fulton and Felix Poon. Erica Janik is our executive producer. Music in this episode by Young Carts subharmonic bliss, Emily Sprague. And to hear him is to love him, Chris Zabriskie. Also, if there are any teachers out there who want to join our cabinet to get paid to work with us, to create lesson plans and activities to pair with our show, get all of the details at civics 101 podcast dot org backslash info. Finally, Hannah and I are going to host an on air ask civics segment weekly on New Hampshire Public Radio. So if you have any questions you like answered in the lead up to this massive election, send them our way. Email us at civics 101 at nhpr.org. Civics 101 is supported in part by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and is a production of NHPR, New Hampshire Public Radio.