 Hannah, if you had top secret clearance and you could access any classified government information, what would you want to know about? I think I would want to know what the real plan is in the event of nuclear war. There's no point in you getting historical at a moment like this. I bet it's a little more grim than we think it is. What about you? The Mary Celeste. What's the Mary Celeste? The Ghost Ship. Oh! It was discovered and no one was on board and there's no sign of a scuffle. It was like the 1800s though. I don't think that top secret to claim, I don't think top secret clearance is gonna tell me about the Mary Celeste. I have another question for you though Hannah. How good are you at keeping secrets? I think I'm pretty good but then at the same time when I buy someone something fun for their birthday, I could just tell you right now. I've always prided myself on the idea that I think I would be able to keep any secret if I really had to. If the stakes were high enough and it was like people will get hurt if you share this secret. Yeah, I'm taking it to my grave. Like what a privilege. It's classified. I could tell you but then I'd have to kill you. Well there's a job Hannah that requires that kind of dedication and I think you just might be the person for it. I work for the government. I have the highest possible security clearance. Don't repeat that. I can't protect you. Because the federal government has a huge amount of sensitive information from military movements to criminal investigations to scientific and technological developments to information about individuals. Close to three million people have some form of security clearance which gives them access to that classified information. It must be precious cargo. Yeah it's just government secrets. This is Civics 101. I'm Hannah McCarthy and I'm Nick Capodice. Today we're talking about how the government keeps its secrets and what it takes to get into the classified club. Mr. Simpson please cover your ears while I say the secret access word. Cheese. Today's guest is Juliette Caim, professor of international security at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government and national security analyst for CNN. She formerly served as assistant secretary for intergovernmental affairs at the Department of Homeland Security under President Obama and she spoke with our former host Virginia Prescott in 2017. Okay so there's three levels at least for the federal government. The top level is of course top secret. That's information that if disclosed would cause exceptionally grave damage. That's the standard. Okay hang on what does she mean by exceptionally grave damage? Some examples of exceptionally grave damage include armed hostilities against the United States or its allies, the compromise of vital national defense plans or complex cryptologic and communications intelligence systems, the revelation of sensitive intelligence operations, and finally the disclosure of scientific or technological developments vital to national security. Why does that just boil it down for me? Basically top secret information is the most important information and that classification is used relatively sparingly. So how does the government decide what rises to that very highest level of top secret? There is a way to distinguish between top secret and everything else. The key difference between the top secret and the other classification levels is that top secret tends to show to the reader say the president or secretary of defense what we call sources and methods. How are we getting that information? We have a spy in an ISIS ring in Germany and he's telling us this and so gosh if that were disclosed or made public you basically someone that person would die. Alright got it top secret is the highest clearance. What are the other two? The next is secret which is if disclosed or released would cause serious damage and the confidential it just tends to be these are things that the government needs to know for a variety of reasons and it could be expected to cause damage. It's so interesting that you've got these qualifications of exceptionally serious serious and just damage right like someone in the government had to sit down and define that. What does that mean? I wouldn't even know how to define that for my own self. So you've got top secret that's exceptionally grave damage right. Secret is serious damage but what is the difference between exceptionally grave and serious damage? This is information that is still pretty important but without those sources and methods so it could be intel about an ISIS ring in Germany but it wouldn't include the people who got the information or how they got it. Okay when it comes to confidential right Juliet said it could just cause damage. So is that like you know a casual callous gossip? You're actually not far off. A good example of that would be maybe a memo from someone in the State Department discussing the you know the drinking habits of the Prime Minister of some country. You just don't want you know you don't want that out there. My question is if someone has top-secret security clearance are they able to know all of the government secrets about anything? That would be cool wouldn't it but it's a little more complicated than that. It's very compartmentalized and rightfully so so that the fact that you have the access does not grant you the right to see all materials that are designated as say top secret. In other words if I have top secret clearance as relates to say Homeland Security issues I can't just email you know or call someone in the department security offices and say I'm really interested in North Korea's nuclear policy can I see those top secret materials? And that's where the phrase need to know comes in. You're on a need to know basis. Even if someone has the clearance for certain intelligence they may not have access to it unless they need that information for a specific purpose. This is important because as we said earlier around 3 million people have some sort of security clearance and that group isn't just made up of government employees and military personnel. For example the Department of Defense may ask a team of cyber experts to come in and and give them advice on you know cyber security though so that's why outsiders sometimes have security clearances. However the majority of people who have clearance about 70% in 2013 were military and government employees like Juliet who work for the Department of Homeland Security under President Obama. So I've heard a lot especially in the past like six to eight years or so about applying for security clearance right and how it can be this long massive process. If you've been invited to do work that requires a clearance you have to undergo an investigation. The government digs into your personal information and your background to determine if you're trustworthy. Sounds stressful. So who is in charge of approving or denying security clearance? Most agencies and departments of the government they conduct their own investigations using the same basic procedures and an investigation service provider or ISP. The main ISP is the Office of Personnel and Management which is an independent agency in the executive branch. And you want to take a guess Hannah as to which department has the most security clearances? I'm gonna guess the one that's conducting secret dangerous operations all over the world that they don't want people to know about aka the Department of Defense. Yeah you got it the Department of Defense holds over 80% of security clearances and the DoD has its own investigation service provider called the Defense Investigative Service. When you say investigation like what does that actually mean? Well essentially the government is trying to create a timeline of your life including all the big moments and all the people in it. So in my case and in most cases what you do is you you know fill out the famous forms with lots of details about where you've lived, your debt, your marital status, your husband or wife or partners actions, where you've traveled, who you've known, who you've talked to, any questions about drug use, about your you know support of the United States and its government. It is painful from any perspective. And the form she's talking about is called the SF-86. It's got all your identifying information including your proof of citizenship. By the way Hannah only US citizens can get security clearance though in some circumstances a non-US citizen can receive a limited access authorization. A lifetime in America has taught me that government forms are boring enough as it is so I can only imagine that this is the epitome of the boring government form. You also have to provide information about your parents and your siblings including step parents, half and step siblings, children and in-laws. So if you have any kind of family drama which is every human being on the planet I can imagine that can get a little tough or awkward. And then there is a record of your mental and psychological health, your criminal record and a history of drug and alcohol use. And here's one that is super interesting to me, your financial record. What I was most shocked to learn is that over half of the people who are denied security clearance are denied because of financial issues like significant debt. Like my student loans might hurt my chances. Yeah any unpaid bills? I understand that though because if you're on the hook for a great deal of money to some other organization you're kind of a liability. Yeah if you owe a large amount of money to someone to anyone it's much easier for outside forces to manipulate you to give you favors to take care of that debt. How long does this whole process take? Like a lot of things it depends on the level of urgency and who the person is. Let's use someone like Rex Tillerson a perfect example. Probably someone who may have had security clearances in the past, he's a private citizen, he's got complicated financial dynamics. Rex Tillerson CEO of oil giant ExxonMobil now tapped to be Trump's Secretary of State. A man with no government experience but decades of deal-making and international business ties. Those ties include extensive relations with Russia and most notably Vladimir Putin. They can probably get through that one in two to three weeks but they're putting a lot of resources behind it. For a lot of people like say my students who may be coming in as a CIA analyst just you know looking at things online and doing analysis for the CIA it can take anywhere from six to eight months. I want to come back to this fact that over half of the people who don't get security clearance are denied because of debt but what are some of the other reasons someone might be denied? Things like personal conduct like if you're telling fibs on an application or you have a history of conduct issues. Another issue is quote foreign influence like you have foreign family members or a financial stake in other countries. I think it's more common that the agents will come back to you and say we have some questions about this so my parents my mother was born in Lebanon there you know there's there's greater concern about people with foreign-born relatives especially a mother or father or a spouse that seems fair since these are national security issues and so then they did need me to go back and sort of validate or verify not just her but her nine brothers and sisters so we're sort of diving into the depths of your own history. And drug use for example marijuana use though it is legal in many states is still a red flag for security clearance. All right once the government has finished combing through your personal life and decided that you are trustworthy enough to get clearance what happens next? Do you have a special badge? Do you have a card that you keep in your wallet? All right we'll get to that and we're gonna talk about how security clearance works in the day-to-day operations of the government and what it's like to have it right after this. But before the break this is your weekly reminder that we have a newsletter it's called extra credit it comes out every two weeks and I warmly recommend that if you haven't subscribed yet you take a moment to subscribe right now at civics101podcast.org. Basically the newsletter is the place where we put all of the stuff that we had to cut from the episode so if you want to know for example about the different classified information that has been leaked or see some pictures of the secure rooms where top-secret meetings take place you can get all that but only if you are subscribed to extra credit. Again go to civics101podcast.org to subscribe today and I swear it's not annoying it's just a really great newsletter. Welcome back you're listening to civics 101 and we are talking security clearance. Okay so Nick let's just say that I just got top-secret security clearance basically my dream. How do I prove that I have that clearance? You don't walk around with a badge all the time that says TS for top security clearance you carry that clearance everywhere you go and so you will be invited or not invited to various briefings depending on that security level. Most government agencies have what's called security offices that's people designated to ensure that government employees who get access to certain information are allowed to get access to that information so that's essentially how it works in terms of functioning of government. And this gets back to what Juliet said earlier about how there's a lot of need to know and compartmentalization. Top-secret clearance doesn't automatically get you into any briefing. So most of the time you will meet in rooms that are designated by the classification so the meeting will be designated a certain classification level so you're you're actually can't go unless you have that classification level so you meet and you don't meet in you know the hallway you meet in what's called a SCIF that's SCIF that's the secure compartmentalized information facility. So those are spread throughout the federal government for example at Homeland Security there are I think a couple dozen SCIFs within the facility including the secretary's office and so in that way there are processes that keep the wrong people out well before you're sitting in the room so it would be it would mean it was bad planning if someone in the room were given top-secret information and they didn't have that classification. Another big no-no in the SCIF is cell phones. The cell phone thing makes sense I mean you can use a cell phone to record anything right? And what about the president? Does the president just automatically have the highest security clearance? Are there any restrictions on the president's access? No, none. I mean none that I know of you know maybe there's some super squirrely world. No if the president wanted any information he could be subject to it. I think people should know though is each principle whether it's you know lower assistant secretary higher secretary or a president each principle likes their information given to them in certain ways. The principles are those officials who have security clearance and the staff who prepare intelligence reports for them they're known as briefers. And so what will happen is the briefers will amend how they present classified information to the principal depending on their issues. A great anecdote that I wrote about about Secretary Napolitano, my boss at the Department of Homeland Security. People forget this but she wanted her first part of her classified briefing most of this is not classified to be weather reports because for her before she got to the classified stuff she wanted her briefings to include unclassified weather reports and so that's what the agents did. I would encourage you not to focus too much on whether it's a category two or three if you are in the storm path you won't be able to tell much difference. Now I have heard that you can have your security clearance revoked which would be such a bummer. How does that happen? So one is the obvious one which is you abuse the obligations you have for having that security clearance and you either abuse it purposefully leaks or whatever else or even on accident. A federal judge today ordered the New York Times to suspend temporarily publication of a series of reports based on a secret Pentagon study of how the United States became involved in the Vietnamese War. The Pentagon Papers it is one example of deliberate leaking of top secret information 1971 Daniel Ellsberg smuggled thousands of pages of a classified report about the war in Vietnam which showed that President Johnson had engaged in expanded secret military operations and lied about it to Congress and the public. I can't regret having done what I knew at the time to be what I ought to do my duty is a citizen I have no no way that I can regret that. Ellsberg was charged with conspiracy espionage and theft of government property but it is enough to be that big even small mistakes can cost you your clearance. You know there are rules about how we treat classified information for a reason and I'm I'm incredibly unsympathetic to people who even make mistakes I mean you are you are briefed on this stuff you don't take stuff home you don't put stuff in your briefcase. One of the things we always see in TV shows and movies are people with security clearance getting in trouble for spilling secrets to their partners or spouses is that a thing? Apparently it is Hannah because there are rules about it. The thing that they tell you which I always take to heart because my husband also had top-secret clearance at a different part of a federal government is pillow talk. You cannot casually say oh we're dealing with this like you actually have to have you know sort of enough devotion to your service to the country to not disclose to a spouse because the worry is is someone says to their spouse you know oh we're we're doing X Y & Z or I'm really nervous about that that spouse casually says to someone else and then that person ends up being married to a reporter. For example former CIA director David Petraeus was investigated after an affair with his biographer Paula Broadwell came to light. Meanwhile FBI investigators continue to pour over Broadwell's computer and boxes of evidence taken from her Charlotte home to determine if she had classified information she was not entitled to possess. The other way it gets revoked is obviously termination. You guys sign a whole bunch of stuff giving up your security clearance hand in anything that you might have in your office that's designated as secure and be escorted off the facilities. I'm curious about Juliet's opinion on this. Does she believe that the security clearance system works? I do I do I mean I think you hear a lot about it now because there's a certain casualness about classified information or top-secret information that you saw in the early days of the Trump administration he's he's getting briefed at Mar-a-Lago or they're they're having meetings that aren't exactly skiffs. President Trump and Japan's Prime Minister Abe dining in public at Mar-a-Lago this weekend learning North Korea just launched a ballistic missile into the Sea of Japan. The two appearing to handle the preliminary response right there in front of other diners. You know it's not so much you worry that the people in the room are talking to reporters is that you know unless you have a secure room whatever is being discussed including top-secret information could be eavesdropped on by foreign agencies. However there was one thing we mentioned earlier that Juliet said is a challenge for security clearance government contractors. Remember a lot of government work especially in national security intelligence is done by contractors because you just really need a lot of bodies and it's sometimes easier to get them outside those people do go through security clearance reviews but you know if you look at Edward Snowden in some cases since that seems to be where there is a loophole. Government investigators thought they knew Edward Snowden. He went through a background check took a polygraph test and sat through personal interviews and then the government gave him access to some of its biggest secrets. Edward Snowden was the contractor who leaked classified information from the NSA the National Security Agency revealing government surveillance programs that had secretly monitored individuals through their phones. I also remember how after President Trump was elected there was some controversy about his son-in-law right Jared Kushner being given clearance. Right Kushner like Rex Tillerson had quote foreign interests those personal or financial ties to other countries. In Kushner's case he had met with Russian contacts including the ambassador and the head of a Russian-owned bank in the months leading up to his security clearance investigation. Any other human being who did what he did and just to remind your listeners he failed to disclose a lot of these meetings and his first round of disclosures through the classified screening process any normal person like you and me who was going through this process who did that it like you're like so not gonna get your security clearance or it's gonna be revoked. In other words if I got security clearance and then it was later learned that I had recent that's what I have to remind people these were recent meetings between myself and Russia my security clearance would be revoked. It's interesting because you have this ostensibly airtight process to grant someone security clearance and a person like me or you would have to jump through so many hoops to get there right right but someone with potentially more red flags than either of us combined given how close they are to power how much power they themselves have can find the loophole into that elite world of security clearance. People have entirely different experiences on getting security clearance based on how much power they have. This is a system that was put into place to ensure that only people who could be trusted with sensitive information are able to have access to it especially information that could impact our safety and security but as with most systems of government it is designed and run by people so it's only as strong and secure as the individuals who uphold it. This episode was produced by Christina Phillips. Our staff includes Jackie Fulton. Rebecca Lavoie is our executive producer. Music in this episode by Pro Reese, First Basis, The Waiting World, Matt Large, Oi, Commodity, Ketsa, Blue Dot Sessions, Chris Zabriskie and Animal Weapon. You can find every episode of Civics 101 at civics101podcast.org or wherever you get your podcasts. Civics 101 is a production of NHPR New Hampshire Public Radio.