 Civics 101 is supported in part by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. The Electoral College votes which occurred today affect the fact that even in the face of a public health crisis unlike anything we've experienced in our lifetimes, people voted. They voted record numbers. Hannah, of the many, many questions that we've received over the last few months and episodes we've made in response, there is one topic that has dominated over all the others. The Electoral College. And it's not surprising. The 2020 election, like many elections before it, brought conversations about the Electoral College to the fore. But we've already done a big old episode on the Electoral College for our Starter Kit series. That we did, Hannah. That we did. But before we close the book on the complicated system of how we vote for the people who vote for the president, I'd like to introduce you to Neil. My name is Neil Walter Young. I am a teacher at Lawrence High School in the Fairfield, Maine. Go Bulldogs! Neil is a member of our cabinet. That's a group of educators from across the country who were designing lesson plans to pair with our episodes. And he wrote me a lovely email about our Electoral College episode. He said that every year he has a lengthy, healthy debate in his class about the pros and the cons of the Electoral College system. And he wanted to share some of those points with us. Some ideas that didn't make it into that episode. And he wanted to fix something we flat out got wrong. So that's what we're gonna do today. I'm Nick Cappadice. I'm Hannah McCarthy. And this is an addendum to our episode on the Electoral College. We got something flat out wrong. We gotta start with that. In the episode, a guest misspoke and said that Maine and Nebraska each have two congressional districts. And this is just Maine pride showing through even our own public radio. This is this one sometimes. So it's always Maine has it's lowly to only two representatives in the house. Nebraska, you know, getting bigger has three. Got it. Unless Maine has four electoral votes and Nebraska five. All right, what's next? The second point Neil made is that since we released the episode, there's been a 2020 Supreme Court ruling, Chiafalo v. Washington, that affects the Electoral College. Mr. Chief Justice, may it please this court. The question in these cases is straightforward. Do the states have the power to control through law how an elector may vote? This is the case regarding faithless electors, right? Electors who vote for a candidate other than the one who won the state. Yeah. In the Chiafalo ruling, what the Supreme Court said is that states can choose to force the hand of the electors in a number of ways. But what it makes clear is that this idea of a faithless electors, those can be a thing of the past. There are many states in which there is no punishment whatsoever. And even those where there is a punishment, it tends not to be more than a thousand dollar fine. If we're in a close election and someone can switch and the slap on the hand is a thousand dollars, that doesn't act as a really good bulwark against any funny business happening. So Neil is arguing that the Chiafalo ruling stops any funny business, as he put it, and could put an end to faithless electors, which would mean that electors would have to vote for the candidate who won the state, no matter what they feel. Unless the candidate died before the electoral vote. But there is still the argument to be made that the framers wanted an elector to be able to be faithless, to generally be guided by the vote of the people, but to be able to make a judgment call on who to vote for. Right. But if you're someone who's all about the popular vote, it is hard to also be someone in favor of faithless electors because they're voting against the will of the people of that state. And this brings us to our third and final point of Neil's. This is funny. I didn't realize it was like a legitimate rebuttal to that episode. I hope any of the presenters on that, people who are legitimately many times more intelligent than I am. So in the last episode, it made it seem that the only argument for keeping the lake toll college is that it ensures smaller states to have a say in the process. But there are really many more areas of debate and reasons than just about this small state idea. If we think back to the constitutional convention, we think of the greatest minds at the time coming together to develop this new nation. And they were able to come to an agreement on beautiful solutions to make difficult problems. We see federalism, we see separation of powers. And then when they're getting to the end of deciding how to elect the president, no one likes the solution. Right. It's thrown out. Should it be a direct popular vote? No, no, no, this isn't going to do. What about if we give it to Congress? And they're like, no, that gets rid of separation of powers. And they end up leaving for the weekend. They leave it to a committee to come up with a solution. And the solution they come up with is Byzantine. It's complicated. It has all these different inner working parts. And essentially, what they decide is that this will be good enough because we all already know that Washington's going to be president. So whatever the kinks are in this system, they'll be worked out as time goes along. Neil pointed out to me that early on, some states like New York didn't do a vote of the people at all. The state legislature appointed electors until 1820. It wasn't until 1828 that this idea that the people's vote should influence who the electors picked for president became a national norm. A lot of the discussions we have about electoral college today are rooted in why don't we just use the popular vote. So I think it's helpful to remind ourselves that throughout history, when do you even have a popular vote? Is it 1828 when only white males can vote, albeit white males don't need the own land anymore at that point? Is it after we pass the 15th Amendment? The 15th Amendment, by the way, prohibits the federal government from denying a citizen's right to vote based on, quote, race, color or previous condition of servitude. Is it after the 19th Amendment and now women are their right to vote is being protected against states who would deny them that right? Is it up through the 1960s where we're talking about again, 10% of African Americans being registered to vote in Mississippi? So when we talk about popular vote, we should understand what we mean by that term and kind of what standard we'd like to set to feel comfortable for. There has never been an election where the majority of the American people have voted for a specific candidate. Wait, what does he mean by that? Let's take 1968 as an example. On our board showing the popular vote, Hubert Humphrey is still ahead, but barely. They're each now has roughly 41%. Humphrey has a lead. That election, Richard Nixon versus Hubert Humphrey had the highest turnout in modern history with 60% of eligible voters voting. Nixon won the popular vote by less than one percentage point. And we don't know how that other 40% of people would have voted. If we replace it, what are we comfortable with to ensure that if a candidate, we have five, six, seven candidates such as think about elections in the recent past in Mexico where you do have candidates winning with 23% of the vote and then step back and say, what percentage of eligible voters even participated? And then you start getting down to very, very small percentages of the entire country's population. And does that still land as much legitimacy in the eyes of voters? And that hypothetical switch to a popular vote system is also pretty tricky. Another thing that comes in is that the electoral system is handled at the state level, right? And this is one of the hard parts about the electoral college is it's really difficult to change one part. You kind of have to change multiple parts that come together. So if we change to a popular vote, how is that regulated through each state? Because every state does its elections a little bit differently. Who's allowed to vote? Felons being a fantastic example. Can you vote from within jail, right? As you can in the state of Maine and Vermont, are there voter ID laws in your state? Can you have no excuse absentee ballots or do you need an excuse? So we'd have to figure out how do we ensure that the requirements in each state are the same, giving up some power to the federal government. Is that a good thing, a bad thing? I am truly grateful that Neil brought these issues up. I'm going to be up all night thinking about this. Me too. And it was especially helpful to hear from somebody who has this debate in his classroom year after year. I have no idea what the right answer is. It's one of those things where I really have no clue electoral college good or bad. It's one of those things where you kind of get stuck in the mud a little bit where you're like, well, I know what the problems are, you know, the devil, you know, and then just enough unknowns about if we go to popular vote enough that make me nervous of what are we going to find out about this after it's in place. So there's the addendum to our electoral college episode. By the way, if you're interested in the work of the cabinet, which is our advisory board of teachers, we're releasing their civics 101 activities at civics 101 podcast.org slash lesson plans. All right.