 Civics 101 is supported in part by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. You know what? More than ever in this series, I am grateful for red tape. Because death is so personal. And in radio, we're not supposed to refer to, quote, the listener, but I'm going to do it. You, listener, I have no idea how you want to talk about death. When I was coming up with ideas for the episode, I was like, I'll open with the Seventh Seal or Bill and Ted's bogus Journey or Barbara Zadagio for strings. Because I don't know. Are you a reverent about death? Does it terrify you? Maybe you're dealing with it right now in your life and it's horrible and it's consuming everything. So all I'll do is say that when I have dealt with death in my own life, I strangely took comfort in the rules and regulations and systems of it because I'm sad and I'm angry and I don't know how I'm supposed to feel. But OK, let's see what the lawyer has to say. How many copies of the death certificate do we need? Let's talk about the arrangements. But these conversations are so awkward. We don't like to talk about it. We don't like to think about it. This is Dr. Ken Iserson, professor emeritus at the University of Arizona Department of Emergency Medicine. He's written several books on death, including Dust to Death. What happens to dead bodies? You know, even in the shoot them up cops and robbers and military films and other media where they show lots of deaths and lots of killings, they don't show the funerals. They don't show the dead bodies, except maybe for Game of Thrones. But in general, we don't. A lot of people don't like to go to funerals. That's not part of their life, which is kind of strange because, of course, it is part of life. I'm Nick Cappadice. I'm Hannah McCarthy. Today on Civics 101, it is the final chapter of our life stages series, death. Can we start with when someone becomes dead? Right. Because we're not going to get into this sort of philosophical question of when is someone, quote, dead, but we can explore when someone is legally dead. Yeah, that's that's a really, really big part of the interaction of law and death. Who decides that a person is dead and how is that done? Well, in every country, in every locale, the basic rule is a person is dead when a physician says the person is dead. So once they're pronounced dead, is that when the death certificate is issued? Yeah. And usually someone checks the clock and they step back and they say time of death for 13 or whatever. But there are two very different ways you can become dead. And Hannah, this can cause some issues regarding what is real. Legal facts and actual facts often but do not always coexist. You all know what that music means. There he is making his last appearance in the series, Dan Casino from Fairleigh Dickinson University. Meaning the fact that something is legally true does not mean it is actually true. So there's two ways you can be declared dead. So you can either be declared dead. Declaration of death happens from either a cop or a medic or a judge, or you can be pronounced dead, which is by a doctor. Now, if you're pronounced dead and a doctor looks at you and says, this guy's dead, there's not much disagreement about that. And the legal fact of your death and the actual fact of your death are two things that are very much in line, depending what state you're in between four and seven years. If you have disappeared and there is no reason why you've disappeared, so the courts are allowed to look in and decide, all right, this person fleeing debt where they leave a note and say they were going somewhere. If there's no reason why you should be missing and you haven't turned up at your usual place of business and there's been effort to find you and you haven't turned up and they put an ad in the newspaper asking for you to turn up and you haven't turned up. Guess what? After between four and seven years, you are legally dead and your heirs can start collect your estate. The government can start giving Social Security to your survivors. Insurance companies have to pay out. And if you decide after that you want to come back and you are not actually dead, just legally dead, well, you're going to have a hell of a time because the Social Security Administration is going to want all that money back that they paid out to survivors and they might not want to pay back. The insurance company, while it turns out they cannot actually take the money back from your heirs, it turns out they can sue you if you disappeared on purpose and try and get the money back that they did pay out from you. And so we have all these cases where people who are, in fact, legally legally dead but not actually dead do come back. But how often does that actually happen? Dan said there are about 100000 dead, not dead Americans walking around right now. That is bonkers. But for the majority of Americans, death will happen in a hospital or home or hospice care. And the funeral service will be contacted to assist with what comes next. But Ken told me it wasn't always that way. In the beginning, in the beginning of our country, families experienced births and deaths at home. They saw many, many, many little children die at birth. They saw that mothers in large numbers die giving birth or shortly thereafter. They saw what happened to the bodies. They helped bury them. They helped prepare them. And then that changed. In fact, the antiquated term undertaker, which I learned you should never call a funeral professional these days, just met someone who undertook a task. And that person is usually a family friend or a relative who helped you bury the body and make arrangements. That person would contact the local cabinet maker to make a coffin and maybe a carriage to take it to the grave site. But that was it. By the way, do you know the difference between a coffin and a casket, Hannah? This isn't a setup for a joke. No, it's not. No. Okay, Nick, what is the difference between a coffin and a casket? It's the shape. A casket is rectangular and a coffin has that irregular hexagonal coffin shape. That's it. And as a fun side note, in the 1950s, there were about 500 casket manufacturers in the U.S. And today, three companies make 70 percent of the caskets in America. So when did death shift from being the responsibility of families and your local cabinet maker to these funeral professionals? Around and after the Civil War, the funeral industry suddenly became a real entity and embalming was developed. And initially, it was developed, of course, for the bodies on the battlefield, especially the officers. They wanted to preserve them and send them home. And then all of a sudden, this body arrived that was supposed to be embalmed. And I guess it was to some extent, but not in a condition you want to look at it. And then the families began using that routinely and gradually sending the whole process over to the funeral director instead of at home. Embalming becomes more popular when formaldehyde becomes readily available in America. And embalming fluid cellars would travel the country to give these like one day crash courses and how to do it to funeral directors. And this means the body can be preserved and therefore more time and consideration given to the funeral service. And that's how we get to today, where a funeral director can provide over 130 separate types of services for a family. Like what? Set up catered meals for services. They contact the friends and family for you about the death, write and place the obituary, arrange the hearse, the church, gravestone, refrigeration, memorial cards, tent at the grave site, washing, dressing, cremating, cascading, cosmetology, and the big one, embalming. Is it legally required that a body be embalmed nowadays? Absolutely not. But there are laws about having to embalm or refrigerate or cremate or bury within a certain time window after death. Did you know the US and Canada are the only two countries in the world where embalming is common? And we bury about 800,000 gallons of embalming fluid every year. Oh. But while all the states have different regulations about burial, embalming is not required as part of your final disposition. Final disposition? A final disposition is that last step. This is Mandy Stafford. She's a funeral director at Mueller Memorial in St. Paul, Minnesota. Hi, I'm Scott Mueller, president of Mueller Memorial, an author of the bestselling book What to Know Before You Go. I had the pleasure of speaking with two Mueller Memorial employees, Mandy and Taylor Johnson, who's in charge of community relations. I'm glad that we get to hear from people who actually do this for a living. Right. And the first thing I asked them to do was to help me clear up any misconceptions about the industry. I'll start. Sorry, but I'll start you right there. Scott doesn't like it when we call it an industry. He prefers it to be called a profession. Nick, you always manage to do this. They were very cool about it. No, no, no. It's a good. It's a perfect example. Perfect example. If I may say Mandy and Taylor were the exact opposite of that film stereotype of the scary funeral director. And they both told me about the laws regarding that final disposition. How you end up. Minnesota has what's called a 72 hour law. And so within 72 hours of when someone passes away, the family needs to make the decision between having cremation take place, being able to do the embalming process or doing what's called a direct burial, which means burial takes place without embalming within the 72 hours. Are those your only three options in bombing cremation direct burial? Not even remotely. Every state may have different laws, but in 46 of them you can be buried in your yard. There are green burials, which are alkalis that break your body down. You can be buried at sea, not to mention the thousands of things you can do with your cremains. And also, and this is where Mandy and Taylor defied my expectations. They expressly said you don't even need a casket or a coffin. You need a rigid container if you're cremated. But other than that, anything goes. A cardboard box, a bed sheet. Wow. Can I ask a quick question? I don't know if you know the answer to this. Sure. I had a boyfriend one. Yeah. Who, I mean, this is just a little fantastical, but his plan for his death was to be taken out to the forest and kind of sink into the earth and be taken away by animals. Can you do that? Can you just let yourself, let your dead body be eaten away and taken away, just lying out there in the middle of the forest? Is that legal? That is not legal. Due to the potential for spreading illness or contaminating a water supply, the body does have to be buried. Oh, what about a Viking funeral? Like a pyre? Yeah. Like a satellite on a boat via a flaming arrow? Yeah. You can't do that. And you're not the first to ask. That's actually a common question. Cremation has to be done by a licensed crematorium because fires that we set just can't get hot enough. How hot exactly did crematoriums need to get to reduce the body to ash? Modern crematoriums get up to about 1800 degrees. There is one and only one outdoor pyre style crematorium in the U.S. It's in Colorado. Now take me through the absolute bare minimum. Someone dies. What do you have to do? Okay. If it happened in your home, unless the person was in hospice care, you have to call the police. They will send a medical examiner and determine the cause of death and write the death certificate. But dealing with the body is probably going to cost you. Lots of life insurance plans help you cover those funeral expenses. Average burial in America, seven to ten thousand dollars. Average cremation, five to six thousand dollars. If you're working with a funeral home, a funeral parlor, you'll probably spend at least three thousand dollars. But what if you have no money? A relative passes away in your home. What can you do? This varies state by state and county by county. But if you're on some manner of governmental assistance, that assistance program will negotiate and cover a simple cremation or a burial with the funeral home. Mandy told me it's usually cremation most of the time because the government program will not help pay for a cemetery plot or a headstone. But the real tricky part in this comes not to how it's done, but who gets to make that final determination of your final disposition? It's your next of kin. You know about the next of kin order, right? No, I don't. It's like the presidential succession. So first it's your spouse and then it's your children. And then it's your parents, siblings and grandchildren and grandparents, the nieces, nephews, et cetera. Here's funeral director Mandy Stafford again. So I think that is really the biggest red tape is understanding who has that right to make the decisions and say there are eight children and four of them want cremation and four of them want a traditional casketed service. That's where things can get a little gray, so to say, because here in Minnesota, we do need one more than half to sign for cremation to take place. And if they can't get that majority? Taylor told me that they just get there. They mediate and they discuss it. And it almost always gets decided within that 72 hour window. So what can I, the currently living, do to prevent this hassle and debate for my next of kin when the time comes? So you want to make it easier for those who love? Yeah. All right. First thing, you have to fill out an advance directive. I'm going to do it as soon as we record this episode. I swear you can download the forms for your state, fill them out in front of a witness, give a copy to your doctor, to your lawyer, to your parents, to your kids. Keep a note saying you have one in your wallet that assures your friends and loved ones that what you want to be done with your body will be carried out. And no one has to make that grueling decision. But even after you deal with the red tape of the burial, you're not finished. Yeah, there's a lot of things that we don't think about because there's especially now in the digital age we're living in, people have so many different accounts and and passwords and usernames and all that. And it's hard to figure out exactly how to close out someone's life. You kind of break it down into two different categories. One would be cancellations and one would be more like asset distribution. So if you're looking at cancellations, something like Netflix, Netflix doesn't have a contract or anything like that. So you can just call Netflix and tell them someone passed away and they'll cancel the account because if you were doing that falsely, it would be easy for the person to reinstate it. It's not a big deal. But you want to use caution when you cancel something like an Amazon account or a an iTunes account because once you do that, you lose all of the assets that were being held by that account. So technically speaking, when you buy a song, air quotes, buy a song on iTunes, you're actually leasing it for your lifetime. Are you kidding me? Like, I don't actually own the copy of a League of their own that I paid for. Those Rockford Peaches are not yours to a spy in Death, Hannah. And my kids could no longer watch all nine seasons of Curious George. Google lets you choose whatever you want to do with your account when it's been inactive a certain amount of time. You can let someone else access it or just lock it all, shut it down and delete everything. And Facebook lets you assign what's called a legacy contact. Phone companies need to be called appropriately enough. But there's one kind of website that is very persnickety about death. So so if you have like an online stock account through E-Trade or TD Ameritrade or something like that, you would you would want to make sure that beforehand, and this is a huge takeaway. And if I could if I could like shake people and say, do this, it would be it would be to say, go into if you have these kinds of accounts, if you have a brokerage account, which is just an account that has that you can trade stocks in or something to that effect, make sure you have a transfer on death filled out because you are not required to fill that out when you when you open a brokerage account, you are required to fill out a beneficiary for an IRA. But if you've got an online brokerage account, you have to go in specifically and and fill out a transfer on death form. And a big thing there is is the biggest most important thing in either of those cases is to not not ever make any transactions after someone has died. If you have the username and password for your spouse or your sibling or something like that, if you're there the executor of their estate, whatever, it doesn't matter. Do not go and make changes because the IRS will not look fondly upon a discrepancy between transactions that were made by quote someone, you know, like by a living person and that conflicting with a a certificate. OK, so now we're into an area that is famously touchy, right? Leaving your assets after death. Your will. Right. Did I ever tell you that I had a program on my Apple to see when I was a kid called Will Rider and my sister and I wanted to start a wheel riding business. Why were you as children? Yeah. Can you write your own will? Sure, you can. There are a ton of YouTube videos with will advice out there, by the way. You can also build your own house. But that doesn't mean you should. A will is an important legal document. When you're left something in a will, does the government take some of that? Is it taxed? This is called an estate tax and the federal government won't do it unless it is eleven point eight million dollars or more that you're left. The state, though, can levy state taxes on that gift at a lower level, but it's still around the million dollar range. However, be warned about capital gains tax. So that's like if you're left a house that's worth 250 grand and you sell it for 275, you get taxed on that twenty five thousand dollar difference. Why are wills so complicated? I know, right? So I asked Leah Plunkett from University of New Hampshire School of Law. Why can't I just write on a piece of paper? I leave everything to my wife and kids and they know what's best. Why are they so tricky? Wills are complicated because we need to make sure that they are made with an understanding by the person who's making them of what they're doing, that they're not being coerced or controlled, but they're being made knowingly and voluntarily and of free will. It's so crucial that we know that that's really your decision. So I've got a piece of paper in my blue professor pen, you know, on the desk right here. If I just write, I leave everything to my husband, two kids and dog. They know what's best. You're an appropriate witness because you're not related to me. You don't have a stake in my will. But how the heck is, you know, a court or, you know, the bank that has the mortgage on our house or any of these other official entities supposed to be able to know that this piece of scrap paper that I scribbled on was really me, that I was really doing it of my own free will. If there aren't certain, I sometimes tell my law students that going to law school is like going to Hogwarts, that there's certain phrases and certain words that are legal terms of art. And if you use them the right way, then magic happens and it's not flying or unforgivable curses. But you do have the power to alter the outcome of someone's life or an institution's trajectory. These are phrases like I, Hannah McCarthy, being of sound mind and body. Yeah. In terms like bequest, devise, right of representation, executor, the female version of which was once an executor tricks, by the way. An executor is the person who carries out the will. And with very few exceptions, your will is going to go through probate, which is a court review to prove the validity of the will. Probate comes from Latin for to prove. And that process of probate can take months up to years. Years. And there's no way around this. There is a way, and I feel like I'm in a commercial when I'm talking about this stuff, but it's creating a trust instead of using a will to give stuff to someone else. If you create a trust, you can choose possessions and money to give to someone before you die and when you die and after you die. And trusts do not go through probate. They don't go through court. Okay. I knew a good number of people in college who actually had trusts like they wouldn't be able to access them until they were like 21 or 25 or 30. But some of these trusts, tell me if this is an actual legal thing, had stipulations like you have to have graduated from college or you can't get in trouble with the law. You can put conditions like that on any gift, will or trust. State Supreme Courts have actually ruled on this. As long as the conditions don't break the law, they are binding and you have to do the thing to get that money. Even things like you have to have an Ivy League diploma or you cannot marry outside the faith. Wow. That's really kind of restrictive and manipulative. But it's legal, man. It's the law. Can I just ask you, Nick, after all of this, have you decided on your final disposition? I haven't yet. But there is something that Ken Eiserson from University of Arizona, he said to me that opened up a possibility I hadn't even considered. There's so much suffering in creation as we know it. We remember today those who've made a difference in the relieving of that suffering by generosity that will never die. I always have felt that the people who donate their whole body to science are really benefactors for humanity. If you contact your local medical school and you start the process, which also requires signing forms in front of witnesses, you can leave your body to medical science. Once it's been used, it's been studied and it's been dissected, it's cremated, the cremations are sent back to you, usually for free. You know, there's one other thing that's associated with it. I think it started at the University of Arizona Medical School and it's gone to other places since. But the medical students actually have a service for all the people who don't enter their bodies for their anatomical training and it's rather moving. The whole class gets together and it's led by diverse religious people. I never knew your name, never knew where you were from. I never knew your face, never knew your voice. I committed every twist and turn of each and every vein and artery to memory. So even though the way we think about death has changed so much in America, I asked Taylor, who deals with death every day, if she had any advice for the rest of us. Definitely don't shield your children from death. Don't shield anyone from it because we're pretty well distanced now as a society from death. We have someone who comes to our house and takes the body away and we don't have to be closely involved as even two generations before us were. So I just encourage people because I spend a lot of time working on grief and those few days that acute loss period is really so vital, framing how your grief experience is going to go for the rest of your life. So don't back away from it. Kind of lean into the the rites and ceremonies that happen when someone dies and always go to the funeral. Mandy told me that it helps with the grieving process and she told me a story about the one time she didn't go to a colleague's and how she still doesn't have closure in that death. Ken told me that it's great, maybe even preferable to not have a funeral at all, but have a memorial service like months or weeks ago. To celebrate the life of that person. Okay, I have to make an advance directive, write a will, write down passwords and tell my next of Ken not to cancel my Amazon. Right. I have a lot of tasks to do before I die. May it be a long time, my friend. So that's it. I think we're done. Cradle to grave. Yeah, almost. Just one last word to kind of put the hat on the snowman before I said goodbye to Dan. He said he wanted to put in one final salvo, a defense for these things that you and I consider onerous. All of these things we're talking about are about bureaucracy or about the federal government putting red tape in your way. And we hate bureaucracy. We hate that red tape. But turns out this is actually a really good thing. So think about it. If I go to the DMV, there's a person in front that person hand me a ticket to the DMV, there's a person in front that person hand me a ticket tells me what line to get in. If Bill Gates goes to the DMV, he goes to the front, that person gives him the same ticket. Listen, that person really loves Bill Gates, loves Windows. I'm sure that person exists. They go out, they want to help Bill Gates. What can they do? Nothing. They give him the same ticket. They are constrained. They have really no way of doing anything other than the one thing they're allowed to do. The whole idea of bureaucracy is it's small d democratic. Everyone gets treated in the exact same way because the bureaucrats don't have any discretion. They don't have any ability to treat people differently. So you and me and Bill Gates and the person's mother-in-law and everybody gets treated the exact same way when they show up. So bureaucracy, while we hate it, while it's terrible because no one has discretion, they can't help you out or something goes wrong. Guess what? It's the most democratic part of our government. So here's to bureaucracy, a word that I can just never spell. Me neither. Really? You also had that one? That's true. I can never do it. It kills me. The red squiggle. I'm like, today I'm not going to get the red squiggle. And there it is. Nick, it was fun exploring the life of an American with you. The pleasure was more than half mine. I agree, Hannah. That'll do it for this episode in this series. Today's episode was produced by me, Nick Capodice, with you, Hannah McCarthy. Thank you. Oh, you're welcome. Our staff includes Jackie Helbert, Daniela Vidal Ali, and Ben Henry. Erika Janik is our executive producer and owns a non-digital copy of A League of Their Own. Maureen McMurray rides a pale horse. Music in this episode by Elephant Funeral, Blue Dot Sessions, Seb Wildwood, Coconut Monkey Rocket, and Chris Sibriski. And Scott Gratton did this inspirational song you listen to here. Don't you just want to walk forcefully up a mountain and stand there with your hands on your hips? Civics 101 is a production of NHPR, New Hampshire Public Radio, and is supported in part by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. But when it comes to dealing with this red tape about death, maybe we're just thinking about it the wrong way. So death is a sort of construct that we fret and worry about a lot, but it doesn't really change anything when we worry about it. This is Albert Camus. I'm Albert Camus. I'm an existentialist. I've written a lot of books on death and dying. Most famously, The Stranger. That's a mother one. I don't know what the hell. I don't know them all, so. He told me that all this fretting that we're constantly doing, worrying about this thing that's going to eventually happen, has no real benefit. When we ask ourselves, what makes someone happy, or how can I not die? That's when misery happens. Misery happens when we search for happiness and meaning. He's a line I like a lot, Hannah, which is that trying to imagine death is like trying to hold water perpetually in your hands. That's so interesting. It is, it is. You're going to let go of that water eventually, right? You're not going to be able to hold on to it forever. That's really nice. I never would have expected that. And he loves our show, strangely enough. I love your show. I really do. I really enjoy it. I think now more than ever, you know, kids are special. Yeah, maybe tell them to stop reading my books in seventh grade. And I really need to hear that mother died today. You know what I mean?