 Hey, I'm Hannah. And I'm Nick. We should do last things. Hey, I'm Hannah McCarthy. I'm Nick Capodice. How you doing, Nick Capodice? I'm good. The name for this script is just waffling, so I just hope we do that. Just bad it out as much as possible. Civics 101 is recorded in front of a live studio audience. Who left the Constitution in the dishwasher? Alright, the reason why we're here, right? We are here because, everybody, we usually air a new episode on Tuesday. If you're a regular listener, you know that. But for a very special reason, we are releasing the episode on Thursday this week instead. And that reason is we are co-producing an episode with our sister podcast, Outside In. Is sister the right word? I think so. You know, like when you're driving through a town in Vermont, and it's like, the sister city does such and such in Germany. Anyways, Hannah, you worked on Outside In for a while. Can you tell everyone who's listening what it's about? Yeah, Outside In is a wonderful podcast. It is also produced from NHPR about the natural world and how we use it. That's the tagline. They have done episodes on everything from the fraught relationship between hiking gear and gender, to the first ever paintball championship. And back when I worked there, this was just one of the highlights of my career. I got to drive up through Canada, like way up in Canada, with the former host of the show, Sam Evans-Brown, to help him work on a six-part series on hydropower. And this Thursday, we are sharing our first ever Outside In and Civics 101 crossover. And it's about a lot of things. It's about habeas corpus, a very controversial court case, and a deep exploration of who gets to be a person. And while we're here, Nick, while we have the people's attention... While we got the mic... Do you want to just talk about some Civics 101 stuff that we've got going on right now? Yeah, absolutely. We have a lot of stuff coming down the pike. Is it the pipe or the pike? I always say the pike, but I'm from Massachusetts, so it's like the mass pike. What's coming down the pike? First off, it's a bit of exciting news. If you follow us on social media, you may have heard. We won an award. We are thrilled, as thrilled can be, to announce that we won this year's Silver Gavel Award for Media and the Arts in the Radio category from the American Bar Association. It's very exciting. This award is for our series on Landmark Supreme Court Cases, 10 episodes on decisions that drastically affect our lives and define our nation. We go from Brown v. Board of Education to Korematsu v. United States to Roe v. Wade. If you haven't heard these episodes, you can find them in our podcast feed. They are some of my favorites. They were some of my favorites to make. They're some of my favorites to revisit and listen to. You can also just visit civics101podcast.org slash SCOTUS, and you can listen to them all in one place. And as for what's coming down that pike, Hannah, what do you have in the hopper right now? Oh, yeah. Well, I've been working on an episode about our national park system that should be out very soon. There's a fascinating history there, but I'm trying not to spend too much time, Nick, on the history, because you know I have a little trouble with that. In 1836, John Muir climbed a tree. Oh, John. I mean, it's a... It's a bad dude, right? Okay, I'm going to keep my mouth shut. I'm sorry. What about you? What are you working on? Well, sort of to sort of take the levity out of the air, as our listeners can probably imagine, we have received a lot of requests in the last week to talk about the Second Amendment, which, Hannah, we have not visited since we became co-hosts of the show. No, sir. And it's time we did. That's going to come out as fast as humanly possible, so stay tuned for that. And also later in the summer, we are going to explore something else that we've never done on the show, literal court cases, cases that deal with issues such as protest, treason, and school segregation. And after that, we're coming back to where we started from, Nick, you and me, because when we first started on the show, we did a series on the 2018 midterms. Our first narrative podcast episodes were about those. And here we are again, and we're going to revisit those episodes. We're going to look at what has changed in the election landscape since. I'm very excited for them. Not to mention other topics we got in the hopper that you're going to see soon, such as the concept of precedent, gender identity documents, and the Voting Rights Act, just to name a few. All right. So that's it. Remember, the point of this was that the episode's coming out on Thursday, everybody, not Tuesday. Yeah, I know. It's just like, sorry, but I promise it's going to be good. Oh, yeah, it's so fun. I mean, it's not just fun. It's also there's a lot going on. Also, I mean, it's May, it's not June. June is a fundraising month for our podcast at NHPR. So I guess we can get the ball started a day early and say that our show thrives and runs on listener support. That's the public radio model. And it's what we do. And that's the way it goes. So it shall be and so be it. So if you like civics, if you like our show, support it. Give a donation, whatever you like. We're just thrilled down to our socks that you that you do it. You'll get a sticker. Just go to civics one on one podcast dot org and click the donate button. Is that it? Yeah. Thanks, everyone. Thanks, everyone. When I used to make these goofy videos and you can still watch them on YouTube about like exploring stuff. I used to end them always with keep being civil. Like that was my funny tagline because it's civics one on one. But you know what? I changed it. I know. I know what it is. Or not. Yeah. You know, because sometimes you don't have to or want to be civil. So anyways, keep being civil or not. Have a good week. See you Thursday. Bye, everyone.