 The Guardian So we are in the Royal Albert Hall, which is not something I thought I would be saying in relation to this podcast, but we found a way. Got us some tickets to PlayStation in concert. So we're going to hear some video game music played by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. What I'm liking about it is it's very red, which is my favourite colour. So all the seats are red, there are red curtains everywhere. It's very fancy, it's round, there's lots of tiers, the stage is enormous, probably because there's going to be an entire orchestra on it. I can tell there are a lot of video game fans because there are people in cosplay dressed as video game characters, there are people with video game t-shirts and... The other day, I was visiting a friend who was watching a television show called Rich House, Poor House, in which families from opposite ends of the wealth spectrum swap homes for a week. I wasn't paying much attention until the background music changed to something deeply familiar and I was immediately transported back in time as I blurted out, that's from The Sims. Outside of being a presenter for Chips with Everything, I also write and talk about video games. They're a big part of my life and I'm not alone. Billions of people play games, they're as much a part of culture as film and television, and now they have their own concert at the Royal Albert Hall. The world premiere of PlayStation in Concert, which took place on May 30th, 2018, featured music from games for PlayStation consoles from the 90s through to today. Arranged by Jim Fowler and performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. My producer Danielle Stephens and I took the opportunity to dress up and see the show for ourselves. I'm looking forward to seeing how it changes from the original PlayStation stuff to the PlayStation 4 stuff. The Royal Albert Hall was opened by Queen Victoria in 1871, seats more than 5,000, and hosts events like the 1968 Eurovision Song Contest, the 100th anniversary of the Royal Variety Performance and the annual BBC Proms. So what does it mean for video games, that they're being presented in these hallowed halls? Do we need the blessing of other cultural institutions to be proud gamers? And I think we don't need to beg for scraps at the table anymore, we are here. And whatever budding composer sees how far video game music has come and wants to get involved, where should they start and what's the future of this industry? Now when we're entering into virtual reality, I've done a bunch of VR games lately, and music for VR is its own unique creature, so there are a lot of different kinds of considerations for that. This is Chips with Everything. I'm Jordan Erica Weber. Good evening, and welcome to the incredible Royal Albert Hall with Iliad! Make a cheer for that, please. You're hearing the voice of Jessica Curry, a BAFTA-winning video game composer, among other things. I'm a composer and co-founder of games development company The Chinese Room, and I seem to have inadvertently become a classic FM presenter and now presenting on stage at the Royal Albert Hall this evening. I spoke to Jessica before the concert, and I was interested to hear how we got to a point where video game music was being performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Albert Hall. Well, I think it's something that had been coming for a long time. I think the hunger for it was absolutely palpable, from everybody, from orchestras, from Sony PlayStation, the fans definitely wanted it. And so I think it's just something that feels like the right place, the right time. I'm particularly passionate about getting games music into classical spaces. It just shows we've made it, we did it. What are some of your favourite pieces from the concert programme? It's hard, genuinely, to pick favourite pieces because I think that so many of them bring back so many memories. Even if it's not your favourite piece of music necessarily, it brings back an amazing gaming moment. I think hearing the new God of War......good-bye, good, sound-filling......by Bear McCreary is going to be amazing. I've not heard that live. There's a world-exclusive MOS by Jason Graves. He is, for me, one of the very best video games composers out there, so I think that's going to be really exciting that basically nobody's heard it and nobody's heard this arrangement. So I think there's going to be, yeah, just a plethora of golden tracks tonight, to be honest. So plenty of people listen to video game music outside of the context of actually playing a game, and my producer Danielle actually told me that her roommate doesn't even play games but still listens to the soundtracks. Why do you think that people, whether they play games or not, do enjoy listening to video game music as this standalone experience? Yeah, it's a really interesting question actually, because it's the same with film. I listen to a lot of film soundtracks that I haven't actually seen the film of, and I think once you attach yourself to a certain composer, like I love Thomas Newman, for example, I will listen to anything that Thomas Newman does with a really open heart and mind because I love him. And that fortunately has been the same for me, and I know a lot of other video game composers that whatever they put out, there is a hunger to listen. And you know, a lot of people couldn't play So Let Us Melt, which was our game that we made for Google Daydream last year because they didn't own the hardware, but so many people have bought the vinyl because they love my music and I think it's like film, it's got to that stage and that size where people know that amazing quality music played by the best orchestras in the world is going to come out of those experiences and I think it's so different, isn't it, whether you've played a game or watched a film before you listen to the music, it transforms the experience, but both are equally valid. And I found that a lot with the classic FM show actually, that a lot of people have never played a video game in their lives, but they love tuning into the show because it's great music and great music transcends its original genre, I think. But obviously, most people do hear a video game soundtrack when they're actually playing the game. So how important is music to that play experience? It's absolutely vital. I mean, I am very biased being a video game composer. It doesn't really matter, but obviously they accompany us through our lives. Some of the God of War, for example, it's a PlayStation 2 title that is still going on today. It's accompanied people through marriages, births, deaths, you know, losing their jobs, all the best and worst experiences in their life. And I think it takes on that iconic reading. If you do play games, it goes past. It's just a piece of music for a lot of people. It really has a very deep emotional meaning for people. And I think that's what's going to make the concert tonight so incredible, is that everyone is bringing their emotional experiences with them and those memories. And I think that's going to be really powerful. Can you think of any examples where maybe the relationship between the music and the video game has kind of gone badly? So a sense where maybe the music didn't fit the game or maybe the music was just bad? And what kind of effect does that have if the music doesn't work? Yeah, I was on the BAFTA jury a few years ago for music and it was Nino Kuni. I'm by Joe Horashi and it is the most incredible score. It's beautifully orchestrated thematically. It's so strong, but it was really badly implemented into the game. And I think it meant I can't remember now, but I'm pretty sure it didn't go through. And I think that's so important. We all know that the people that are working within the industry isn't just about creating a great soundtrack. It also has to be a living, breathing part of the game. And if you separate out those two things, it's at your peril because it definitely does have a really big impact on your enjoyment and your sense of immersion, I think, within a world. Do you think we're going to see video game music compete properly with mainstream music in the future? Is that even something that video game music wants? Yeah, husband Dan and I talk about this a lot in terms of do we need the blessing of other cultural institutions to be proud gamers? And I think we don't need to beg for scraps at the table anymore. We are here. So what's it been like for you hearing the songs from games you played maybe decades ago? Yeah, it's fantastic. You hear them at home when you're playing them. It's an immersive experience because you're playing. But it's great to just come and see it being played live because you get to see what instruments are played, how they're played. And it's good to get gaming out there. So I think it should have done this a lot sooner. So if this concert is anything to go by, video game music has proved that it has a place in culture. But will this increased recognition encourage new composers to try their hand at this interactive medium? And how would they go about it? It's easy right now to get into games because they're not as prohibitively difficult as they used to be for an amateur gamer, someone who hasn't gotten into it. So but I think really becoming familiar with what games are and the kind of experiences you have is crucial. We'll look into that more after this break. It's your weekend. Make space to be inspired. Pick up The Guardian and The Observer this weekend. Welcome back to Chips with Everything. I'm Jordan Erica Webber. Before the break, we spoke to Jessica Curry, the presenter of the world premiere PlayStation in concert. But how exactly has the video game music industry changed and how should composers adapt? Hello. Hi Winifred, it's Jordan. Hi, Jordan. How are you doing? I'm good. How are you? I'm doing great. Winifred Phillips is another award winning video game composer and author of a book called A Composer's Guide to Game Music. She puts her success down to a combination of her experience composing for other forms of media and being in the right place at the right time. Well, it all started. Gosh, it must have been around 2003. I think I was finishing up work on another project, which was actually for the radio. And I'd always been a pretty avid gamer. So I remember I was playing the original Tomb Raider and some of the music from the game starts playing a classically inspired music. And I was listening to it. And I remember at that point, the idea of writing music for games first popped into my head. And then there at one point, I'd done three games that were never released. I'd composed music for three separate games that just sort of died. And I was feeling really depressed. So I just kind of decided to go for a Hail Mary pass. And I sent an email to Sony Computer Entertainment America. Actually, it's now called Sony Interactive Entertainment now. And I spoke with their head of music and I just asked to be considered. And I think it was the timing really that was the part that mattered the most because I happened to I happened to contact him at a point where they were looking at their needs for a particular big project. They wanted to expand a single composer into a team because the music requirements for that game look like they're going to be huge. So they were they were thinking about adding people. And I just happened to contact them at exactly the right time. Even if luck contributed to her big break, Winifred has continued to compose for a wide variety of video game soundtracks. How does the music industry within video games look? What kind of roles are there? And is it similar to other music industries? Well, I would actually say it's that similar to other music industries because the music creation for games is very unique. It's interactive. And there are lots of technological requirements from people who work in music for games that really aren't present in any other form of music composition or production. So you have to really specialize. So there are music directors and audio directors and music producers and things like that. And then of course there are music composers and some of us are in house. But the majority of us are freelance. So we're working all over the world and we're working for lots of different game developers. It's very interesting, unique kind of work because I've worked with developers that are located pretty much everywhere in the world. So it's been really interesting for me. Would you say that the video game music industry has changed much since you started? Well, actually, yes. I think it has changed quite a bit. The interactive constructs of music for games have become much more ambitious. Music has the ability to react instantaneously to the actions of the player in his or her decisions. Those kinds of things which make music for games quite malleable. It's become more and more sophisticated as the years have gone by. The tools and the technology have advanced. Now when we're entering into virtual reality, I've done a bunch of VR games lately and music for VR is its own unique creature. So there are a lot of different kinds of considerations for that. So that's been a fascinating thing to explore. It sounds like there's loads of work and kind of specializations and interesting things for people who want to compose video game music to do. And you've actually written a book called A Composer's Guide to Game Music that contains loads of advice for budding video game composers. So if anyone is listening to this and they want to start composing scores for PlayStation games, where would they start? Well, I think it helps if you either are a gamer or decide you're going to become one. And it's easy right now to get into games because they're not as prohibitively difficult as they used to be for an amateur gamer, someone who hasn't gotten into it. But I think really becoming familiar with what games are and the kind of experiences you have is crucial. And then after that, you can study game scores written by other composers just to get a sense of how problems have been solved by other artists in this area. And then past this, you just start kind of developing your familiarity with companies and publishers and trying to build up a list of contacts. Going to industry events like the Game Developers Conference and E3 are helpful because then you get the opportunity to meet people face to face. I mean, that's how I started. So I can attest that it can help. The good news is that there are so many different kinds of games now, so many different platforms and different developers who are stretching out in different directions. There are a lot of opportunities for new composers trying to jump into this crazy industry. So that's something that can give a lot of newcomers hope. We're talking about this PlayStation concert that's taking place in the Royal Albert Hall. With things like that happening, it feels like video game music is gaining some real recognition that perhaps it hasn't always had. Do you think that's increased the prestige of being a video game composer? Do you find that people admire what you do or do you still sometimes face this kind of bafflement that I know I get sometimes when I tell people I work in video games? There certainly is a conception of what video games are that is rooted in the days of Pong and has no relationship to what games are now, but it's still really pervasive. It's just it's dug, it's claws in. And the things like concerts like this one help to acquaint larger audiences with what games actually are right now, which is just very different. It's as if people would still think of the movie industry as being silent films and you have to continually tell them, no, no, let's go see an X-Men film. You know, this is what it is now. And it feels like we have to continually do this over and over and over again. But on the other hand, something like this concert series, it really is designed to appeal to an audience that doesn't play games. I mean, this is an audience of orchestral music lovers. And these are the kind of people who would really love the music being created for games, but would never consider listening to it outside of a venue like this. So we'll be given the tools to be make reading redress devices. Both Jessica and Winifred spoke about the kinds of people who listen to video game music, whether or not they play games. But we thought we'd let some of our fellow concertgoers tell us themselves. I do play games. I do play games. What kinds of games do you like to play? I just play normal video games. But I haven't heard any of this. I like orchestral music and I like watching him play games. So it's kind of a bit of both. Hi, I'm the him. It brings back so many memories and it's been incredible. I've never played games and I don't stand the gaming industry at all. But the music is awesome. I've followed Jessica Curry's career and Austin Wintery's career, who's one of the composers of Journey specifically. And so through them and through the games and the music sort of everything came together. I'm a massive gamer and I also enjoy this kind of music. Our interesting tech fact this week takes us to Papua New Guinea, where the government has banned Facebook for a month. According to the communication minister, Sam Basil, the hiatus will enable his department to study the effects of Facebook on the population of Papua New Guinea and to identify users who have fake accounts or post false information or even pornographic content. What would you do if you couldn't access Facebook for a month? Let us know what you think. Send us an email at chipspodcastattheguardian.com. I'd like to thank Jessica Curry and Winifred Phillips for joining me on the show this week. There'll be a link to Jessica's classic FM radio show, High Score, and Winifred's book, A Composer's Guide to Game Music, on this week's episode description on The Guardian website. I'm Jordan Erica Webber. Thanks for listening. For more great podcasts from The Guardian, just go to theguardian.com slash podcasts.