 The Guardian. 2018 has been an interesting year. Jack Dorsey, the CEO of Twitter, will testify in front of the Energy and Commerce Committee on September 5th. Tech giant CEOs were brought up in front of Congress. The European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, known to friends as GDPR, goes into effect tomorrow. The General Data Protection Regulation came into effect in May, and our email inboxes were never the same. There is growing anger as to how it allowed the harvesting of 50 million of its users' private profiles. Cambridge Analytica was accused of harvesting personal data without permission. There are new signs that Julian Assange could soon leave the Ecuadorian Embassy in London. Julian Assange is still in the Ecuadorian Embassy, so no real change there. But he is apparently in some hot bother for not looking after his cat properly. It's been a big year for this podcast, too. I got to hear some of my favourite scores from some of my all-time favourite video games, played by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Albert Hall. And then, on a completely different note, I learned more than I ever thought I would about artificially intelligent sex robots. The last 12 months have been filled with tech highs and lows, so it's fitting that we finish off the year by reminiscing, laughing and perhaps trying not to cry at some of the biggest stories that we've seen in 2018. I'm Jordan Erica Webber, and in the run-up to that awkward period where you habitually write an 8 at the end of the date and then scribble a 9 over the top, we're looking back at what happened in 2018, and more importantly, looking forward to what we hope, and perhaps dread, to see happen in 2019. This is Chips with Everything. Have you read Kieran's new comic, by the way? Die, no. I decided this year to switch to Trades because I have no physical room for physical comics full stop. As I mentioned, a lot has happened in 2018, so I'm not going to attempt to decipher it all by myself. So I invited my friend and colleague and The Guardian's UK tech editor, Alex Hern. Alex, how's it going? Are you happy to have a holiday, finally? I'm happy to have a holiday. I'm playing far too much Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Brawl Melee. I can't remember how many subtitles it's got these days. Ultimate, because it has, it's the ultimate version of the game. It's got every character from everything ever in it. Except you have to unlock them all, so it's going to take you dozens if not hundreds of hours. Which is great, because I'll probably be spending that much time playing it anyway. What else would I be doing? Okay, so how about you start us off? Thinking back on everything you've written this year, which is a lot, what has been the most interesting topic you've covered? The most interesting topic I've covered, it has been the just complete slow motion collapse of Facebook. Not yet as a company, but certainly as an organisation that can portray itself to the public as a force for good, as something to be liked. The thing I always come back to as a hallmark for how untrusted Facebook is, fundamentally amongst the public at large, is this persistent rumour, conspiracy theory, meme that the company spies on you using your microphones to target you with advertising. Yeah, people won't stop talking about that. Everyone believes it. It doesn't matter that Facebook says it doesn't do it. It doesn't matter that no security expert has ever found any evidence of this listening operation. People fundamentally believe in their heart of hearts that Facebook is the sort of corrupt company that would do this and lie about it and persistently lie and engage in a conspiracy. It occupies that tier of thought. And maybe one of the most damning pieces of evidence about social media companies being portrayed and viewed in this way is the fact that their own creators don't tend to use them as much or in the same ways as regular people. So I think I've seen you tweet before about how if you're a friend of one of the higher ups at Facebook, then you're treated differently than regular users. Absolutely. So this was a thing that came out in November when we had this huge tranche of emails which were through a circuitous route released to the Department for Culture Media and Sports Select Committee, which then published them under parliamentary privilege. And one of the things these emails showed is that way back in 2015 when Facebook tightened up its privacy controls, it removed the access of a lot of apps to friends' data. In hindsight, we probably think actually that was quite a good thing. It caused some fuss at the time. And one thing it did was it broke some apps that relied on that. The good news is if your app was used by Mark Zuckerberg, Sheryl Sandberg, or any of their friends on Facebook, you got specially flagged for enhanced treatment beforehand. In other words, you got warned about the change. You got developer time given to help you fix it. It's the anti-dogfooding, this principle in Silicon Valley that you should eat your own dog food, that you should use the same products that you're selling to your customers so that you know what's good and bad. Here Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg get special luxury dog food which has no problems, guaranteed to be fault free. And you see this throughout the industry. You get, for instance, Jack Dorsey who is the most prominent tweeter on the Twitter staff but still tweets far, far less than his own company's power users. They occupy this weird realm where they get to rewrite the rules of the social, not the social network, but the community that we all live in. They live in a slightly different one. And I worry that on one hand that means that they don't know what they're selling to their customers. They don't really understand what it's like to use their own products. And on another level that it shows that actually they know that their products are not really great to use. They create anxiety and unease in their users. They let their more prominent and successful users be open to unbounded hostility from a public which still doesn't quite understand the flattening and coarsening effect of social media. And they allow their smaller users with fewer followers to kind of get caught up in this weird fame game where every like and follow and interaction matters strongly to your self-worth even though they're just numbers. So do they know something we don't then? Like Mark Zuckerberg famously puts a sticker over his webcam as we saw in that image. Do the people in Silicon Valley know something that the general public doesn't? So I don't think they know something. I think, you know, the standards of evidence for that are quite high. We would be talking about a sort of 1960s cigarette industry scale coverup if they actually knew that social media was bad for you and didn't spread it. I think what they have is they have that same gut feeling that a lot of people who got very into social media eight or nine years ago and perhaps dialed back their use. That same gut feeling they have that just it just doesn't quite feel good. And it doesn't feel bad in the same way that like going to the gym a lot feels bad. It feels bad in the same way that eating a lot of donuts feels bad. So over the course of kind of doing this this research into social media and its use by its executives, have you found yourself cutting back on your own use? I know you deleted Facebook a long time ago. Yeah, no, I have. It was a pair of stories this year. It was that and also one about Instagram looking at why it makes so many people feel bad. Both of them combined to make me spend a lot less time on social media. Some of that's been easier than others Instagram I have posted on four times this year and just dialing back on that has meant that I've opened it less often and it's kind of fallen off. Twitter has been harder to fall off. I've used Apple's new screen time limits to set myself a limit of an hour a day. Today I hit that at 10 30 a.m. I'm not very good at going. Oh well I hit the limit definitely won't just open up Safari and go to Twitter.com. Oh no, I've done that. Oh well, there goes the day. Your mention of Instagram makes me feel kind of bad. I don't know if you heard our episode about virtual celebrities. So we talked about the hologram superstar Hatsune Miku and then we talked about this Instagram influencer who is a CGI Michaela Sousa or Lille Michaela. Now we spent an entire episode looking at what it was about these stars that gets people obsessed. I even had my little sister Che give me the goss on what Michaela had been up to. But despite learning just how non real she is, producer Danielle and I both started following her and just a couple of weeks ago actually I texted Danielle really excitedly because Michaela and a colleague of mine from the gadget show had both been at the same event. I thought this was really cool. Do you have any theories on why Danielle and I are so obsessed with Lille Michaela? I actually I do. I have quite strong feelings about Lille Michaela. The reason why you need a fake influencer is because being a real influencer is so destructive. You look at the first generation of huge YouTube stars and those who haven't just left the site are all breaking down. They are all really suffering under the pressure of producing daily content of just doing that chummy friendly self expression in a way that makes everyone feel like they're your best friend. So why not build a virtual one who could be run by a team of 15 people who can take holidays and have days off and still Lille Michaela can continue to produce content endlessly. Yeah and we talked about this in the episode actually. She's kind of perfectly woke as well and she's always supporting good left wing causes and can kind of do no wrong. I guess because she's virtual right? Because she is the perfect Instagram star. Which is one way of looking at that. It's great. It's saved at least one potential influencer from being chewed up and spat out the other side. The downside for the humans involved is that it is literally an unrealistic standard. There is no way you can be as good at Instagram as Lille Michaela because you have to sleep. So the other big story that tech journalists like you and I cannot escape is algorithms. What have they been up to this year? All of the algorithms. What have they done? It is a very silly story but I kind of think it was the the apotheosis of a bunch of different trends was this company I did a mini profile of halfway through the year that was trying to use a huge bucket of social media data to build the perfect millennial baiting experience economy event. This company ran a bunch of Facebook pages called things like Secret London which ostensibly began as like hero fun quirky little things for you to go to. These multi-million follower pages that kind of just existed to share large one-off events. Things like Secret Cinema, things like Cocktail Pop-Up Bars and so on. And now this company has decided to go one step further and actually create events for its own pages using the social media data it has to tell it what works and what doesn't. So one thing that they did was a gin themed cocktail pop-up in a double-decker bus that was Alice of Wonderland themed in Brooklyn which is like it's just a bunch of buzzwords thrown together. Gin, cocktails, Alice in Wonderland, double-decker bus. The bus had a thatched roof so because that ticks a box and by all accounts it was extremely good and it's just kind of it's these trends of on the one hand people using social media data in particular but kind of just large data sources in general to try and automatically perfect things which previously had perhaps a little bit of human curation involved. But this happens with Netflix as well right so Netflix looks at our viewing habits and then puts together different elements that it finds people like into new shows. Absolutely it does that like they one of the big attentions inside Netflix as I understand it is between the kind of main core team who really want to use data to produce shows that are perfectly pitched at segments of their audience who they find are underserved by the content of the platform and the actual content creators who are still fundamentally old school TV types Hollywood types who do still believe in the artistry of the whole thing and I think there is a bit of attention inside the company over that which currently the TV types are winning because the TV types have made all of the TV on Netflix and so fundamentally like the success is on Netflix if it's the Oscars it's won and so on can be pointed to the creatives not to the algorithms. Have you ever had that thing on Netflix where it tries to categorise you with something really precise like female led shows with a supernatural twist from the 90s? I haven't but I think that's just because I've never scrolled down far enough on Netflix I am still one of the things I try and do is be quite measured about how much I let algorithms like that pick what I do. So by and large I decide what to watch before I open up Netflix so that I won't be you know scrolling through a list of 40 things and then find A find the uncomfortable truth about what it knows about me like you like turgid superhero films starring pretty white men it's like oh no no this is too real Netflix. I'm so red so obviously I'm also a person who watches a lot of superhero stuff and science fiction especially which is why one of the episodes of the podcast this year that I found the most interesting is this one we did about basically sci-fi and why we're so obsessed with it we talked about flying cars and then we interviewed sci-fi author Cameron Hurley about why she thinks people are so obsessed with these kind of weird hangovers from like 1950s science fiction that aren't really that workable anymore but we still want them because they've been a staple of science fiction for so long. We still want our flying cars we still want our domestic robots that sort of thing. Yeah right like it's like the fallout games where basically the entire point of the game is that the apocalypse happened in the 50s so everything is based on their idea of what the future would be like so yeah we've got these robots that float around the house and do chores and you know I'm sure there's something about flying cars in there. It feels like it's the last time science fiction was sort of optimistic. Do you think that's it? I do feel like we are having a turnaround at the moment because so Cameron mentioned this actually she was talking about the science fiction she grew up with was really dystopian and you know cyberpunk right but we're living cyberpunk now. Yeah we all were just. What happens if big data well it's happening. Crappy dystopia. Yeah so I think that there is I mean there's stuff that Cameron writes is a really new look at sci-fi she does all this stuff that's based on like I mean it's very woman led. I've definitely read one of her novels. But yeah but it's really interesting and kind of use of the natural world and moving away from the very like chrome heavy sci-fi that we're used to. Do you not see that a more positive twist in sci-fi? I've seen a few one of my favorite sci-fi novels that I've read recently was by Becky Chambers. I love her. Yeah a long way to a small angry planet which was had in its DNA clearly a little bit of Firefly that the old just weeding TV show and a little bit of Mass Effect kind of it was basically space friends right like fun people flying around space largely getting on with each other and pushing through trials and travails through team team building and fellowship and that that that was optimistic. I liked that but I do feel that part of the reason why it was optimistic was that it was fundamentally science fiction about characters and people rather than science fiction about the state of the world. I've not read much science fiction that serve is trying to make a commentary on the present day or a commentary on how the future could evolve that doesn't feel these days a bit a bit pessimistic. Am I wrong? I feel like as the world gets more and more dystopian it will be an inevitable result. In the 50s that the reason for a lot of the utopianism as well as you know the psychology of coming out of a vastly destructive war and imagining a better future part of it was that you know it was looking at the rapid technological progress of the previous few years and extrapolating right like you know so much has changed over the past past five ten years imagine how much more is going to change over the next but seeing that in a positive and the thing I find quite interesting is that it feels hard to argue that the last ten years haven't been one of the most rapid aeons of technological progress you know over the last century but now I feel like most people and certainly most science fiction authors are looking at the the idea of what the world would be like if that progressed for another hundred years and they're not really coming down on the side of like hey it's gonna be great imagine if algorithms get this much more powerful for ten times this long it's mostly like oh which is strange right because you know in the 50s it was it was nuclear right which obviously is a thing that could have catastrophic effects on humanity in the same way that big data can in fact it's probably a much worse way. There was a lot of pessimistic science fiction at that time it's just that there was also this sort of happy Jetsons vision of the future and that's I feel what's... I wonder if it's just that we're a bit more switched on now. Maybe or maybe it's maybe it's just that the Jetsons had a disproportionately large influence and that we're all focusing on one kid's cartoon show while ignoring the vast gamut of pessimistic 1950s sci-fi. Very much of its time. So speaking of the future after the break we're going to look at first some other stories from 2018 that we didn't get the chance to cover ourselves but that definitely weren't a mention but also we will look ahead to next year and what we're expecting could make a splash in our 2019 New Year's wrap. We'll be right back. Hey podcast fans. Looking for something fun to do over the festive period? Maybe you or someone you know got a Google Home as a gift. Well we want to tell you about the Guardian's Year in Review, a project we've been working on with the Voice Lab. It's a fun interactive review of some of the Guardian's biggest and oddest headlines of 2018. So if you checked out the Guardian's podcast this year we think you'll enjoy a year in review. To play just say hey Google talk to Year in Review. Bye for now. Welcome back to Tips With Everything. I'm Jordan Erica Webber and this week I'm joined by the Guardian's UK tech editor Alex Hern. Hello. Right so before the break we looked at some of our favourite pieces of work that we did for either the Guardian newspaper or for this podcast but Alex is there anything that you would have liked to have covered that you didn't get a chance to? What other stories caught your eye? Literally just as the year was coming to an end the New York Times published the story that I am the most jealous of not having written myself of anything that's been published this year. They managed to crack an area of tech which is one of those things that inside tech everyone knows quote unquote right but it's been very hard for us to really explain what's so bad about it. It is the pervasive tracking of your location by smartphone apps and it's easy to on the surface say well that you know that sounds bad people don't like to be tracked but what's been tricky is A demonstrating what that tracking actually entails how widely it's done and how many people are affected and B just what comes from it. So the New York Times and I would kill to know how they got this managed to secure a database of one million people's locations in the New York City area gathered by an advertising company that uses third party smartphone apps to haul in location data. From that what they did was they just showed the sort of insights you can uncover from people's location obviously that includes where they live where they work you can also for instance identify 50 60 children in the data set whose phones arrive at a school stay in the grounds of the school till about 8 30 go into the school leave the school for recess go into the school and come out at three you know okay so you've found kids in the data set well in Europe and in some states in America that would imply you know huge amount more privacy protection but not in all states and then what the New York Times did was just break down how a data set like that gets formed and that's the that's the side of it that we all know where we exactly where we is a vastly smaller subset of the world than it should be it is for instance a large number of weather apps of restaurant finder apps this sort of thing which can justifiably ask for your location but when it does it is not bound by any contract or requirement with the platforms to only use that information for its you know front of the box purpose they all to be clear are doing this completely legally which perhaps is more about what the law should be than what their behavior should be because they have privacy policies that do say that they can use your location to serve targeted adverts to you this reminds me of the the Venmo public by default project that we talked about in an earlier podcast episode where Hung Doti Duck found public transactions for a certain group of people and was able to just publish exactly what those transactions had been to kind of raise awareness of the fact that on Venmo unless you checked this box to say don't make my transactions public all of them were so you know you've got people who are selling weed on Venmo because you know you think that it's a bit more secure turns out not so much so do you think something will come of this then will people stop using location services will you maybe get a change in the law obviously this is something we talk about a lot how the law just doesn't catch up with technology so the upside of Venmo is that it was quite clearly a bad decision by one company that could be rectified the problem with this is it is systemic and systematic you know it's not one company it's not one setting it is the entire advertising ecosystem is very very happy to use this and the problem is that consent just doesn't really work as a basis for privacy because privacy policies are long and not read and people give consent to a lot of things so the only two real outcomes are either you actually have to drastically enforce rules on quote meaningful consent which hasn't really been fought in many courts to date because it's really hard to define or you have to just start going well actually doesn't matter if people consent to this stuff you still can't do it is this going to make users like regular people change their behavior at all do you think the problem is and one of the reasons why this is such a bleak story is there's not a huge amount of behavior that you can change if you are on an Android phone then the settings and permissions regime is quite complicated Google hasn't acted as a perfect gatekeeper of the app store and a lot of people particularly in China use third party app stores anyway which means that there isn't really a centralized port of control on this and even if you're on iOS the only option you have really is enable or not enable location data and if you're using something like a weather app so unless you actually sit down and work out which companies you trust with your data there's not much you can do about this and in an ad funded ecosystem as frankly with most of the digital economy for that value of trust I'm not sure there are many you can trust all that was bleak wasn't it do you have anything better anything happier not quite I'm afraid there are there are kind of a few things that we didn't get a chance to cover this year so things like net neutrality which we mentioned in I think one or two episodes but didn't get a chance to really dig into and obviously that's that's a huge thing with huge ramifications that we just haven't had the time to look at there was also the uber autonomous vehicle killing a pedestrian which is this a really complicated thing and there was one more story that I kind of saw from the sidelines but didn't get to dig into and that was the Google walkout over sexual misconduct allegations we didn't cover it for the podcast but you wrote about it right yeah I went down went down there to to cover it I found it at the time a really interesting event you know put it putting aside for a moment what it was about it was just a fascinating sort of reinvention of what organized labor looks like in the tech economy in 2018 because this was a strike essentially you know a short symbolic strike where a huge number of the participants in the London office certainly were actively afraid of being seen to be publicly doing this they didn't want to speak to the press they weren't really happy with their faces being attached to it this is fundamentally non-unionized workplace right so in the old style language of unionization and workplace politics this was a wildcat strike but nonetheless it's fascinating that some people who are objectively some of the most valuable employees in the world don't have the power within the workplace to publicly protest even in a situation like this where there is overwhelming it seems support from inside the company for their movement nonetheless the thing that happened over the course of that day as the story you know moved to first the East Coast of America and West Coast of America because it happened at 11 a.m. local time all around the world was the sheer weight of numbers actually started shifting that I had a cynical tone earlier on in the day in the grand scheme of things by the time it hit Mountain View it was quite clear that this was actually a very large movement that had a strong chance of achieving its aims and I think that as that became clear to the Google protesters as well they started opening up they started talking to the press they started being happier to be seen protesting their company's operations and this question of unionization like the fact that Google employees don't have a union seems quite astonishing I don't know if I've got a warped view on this though because I have seen all this stuff happening in the video games industry which obviously you and I both followed very closely but game workers unite they've just launched a UK union and it's having ripples all around the world I think it started in America but are we seeing more tech companies employees unionize I mean the true answer still is no actually that the tech industry is so resilient to unionization I think it's also the labor politics of the tech industry are odd it's it's one sector of the economy where labor already has a huge amount of bargaining power the same thing that means that you don't feel a push to join a union is why you have a seven figure starting salary if you have a machine learning PhD and a joining a company like DeepMind if you're owning seven figures you probably don't really feel the need to join up with your colleagues and bargain for better conditions you have pretty bloody good conditions already although not necessarily if you're a woman exactly of color or so what's happening is you're kind of seeing a unionization cut across different issues than traditional unionization you know has happened at the turn of the last century rather than a desire to push for sort of straight high pay you're seeing solidarity between temporary employees and contracted employees and staff you're seeing solidarity in workplaces which are overwhelmingly white and Asian and male you're seeing solidarity with outsourced employees overseas and you're seeing and a big part of it is a desire to control what your work is used for and I think in some of the bigger companies that might end up being one of the larger drivers for unionization okay so obviously there have been some not so great stories to come out of the tech world this year but what about next year is there anything to look forward to do you have anything to be hopeful for I am really hopeful that 2019 is the year that we can all just stop thinking about cryptocurrencies for a bit it has occupied an uncomfortably large proportion of the tech presses mines the column inches the invested capital and so far essentially nothing has come of it it's been one of the certainly very large boom and bust but you know there have been boom and busts in techs before what's interesting here is it been a boom and a bust and nothing has been left there's no railroad tracks or at least you've got infrastructure built there's no useful companies climbing up the record with low evaluations there's just nothing maybe maybe we can just all ignore it for a year and then Eve in 2020 there's still something there worth looking at I'm hopeful about that so just take a year off take a year off just take a year off I did like the one mention that we made of cryptocurrency in our podcast which was about kind of blockchain art I thought that was possibly the most interesting perspective you could have on blockchain but I totally agree with you god bless artists because artists can make anything interesting and can make anything useless vaguely worthwhile I appreciate I kind of tricked you a bit that that was a hope for a negative how about you do you have anything more more positive to be hopeful for yeah so unfortunately my choice isn't very hopeful either I just want to pause here for a while and tell the listeners I promise we do actually love tech the tech world digital culture we wouldn't be doing the jobs we do if we didn't chips has been accused of hating technology in the past but that isn't true we just when a big story comes along we cannot ignore it and you know often the important stories are the uncomfortable ones so my potential worry the next year is what will happen to the tech industry when Brexit happens I mean if Brexit happens when Brexit happens who knows at this point I mean the tech industry does feel a bit more exposed than most doesn't it yeah like so I've been seeing it in video games again and sorry to bring it back there but I know you also love them yeah but there's this group games for EU right who are trying to protest Brexit because the games industry relies so much on European talent for instance is that also true across the tech industry yeah so tech has historically you know involved quite a lot of mobile workers people flock to tech conglomerations places like Silicon Roundabout in Old Street places like Berlin where there is small clumps of high-value creation tech businesses with Brexit being particularly so focused on taking control of our borders a lot of people in in both tech and games are just basically worried that they're not going to be able to get the experts that they need and it's not a case of sort of as as some people have said you know why not just hire British experts the combined output of British universities in say machine learning just doesn't equal the combined number of new machine learning jobs that that could change slowly over time but we're talking about industries who are hiring now not hiring in four years at the end of a graduate conversion course even outside of things quite as complicated as machine learning basic programming we have a skills gap in the UK we don't have enough kids learning how to program and then on top of that of course tech is an area where regulation is rapidly becoming a hugely important area so the other big thing that the tech industry is concerned about in the UK is just not getting a say in that GDPR has changed the world not just changed Europe when it comes to data protection regulation it set a model for other countries America is very explicitly looking to Europe for a lead or Australia so there's New Zealand and you know that that regulation was created with input from the British industry after Brexit that that simply won't happen fine for the multinationals who have a presence in Europe but if you're a relatively large UK firm you're going to be a rule taker not a rule maker the the question of whether or not the UK tech sector can thrive in an independent Singapore style low tax nation versus one that is pegged into the wider networks of trade I'm not investing money in the UK tech sector and the people who are seem to still be doing it so there is some hope there a hopeful note to end the show and while we're on this trail of thought what are some of the great things to come out of the tech world this year the place I would focus on is actually consumer technology which has just kind of gone from strength to strength I think the lowering prices of noise cancelling Bluetooth headphones are going to make everyone's sainer on public transport I think the switch finally being widely available in shops is going to make no switch everybody even more people say in a run public transport because it's just a beautiful little games console and I think the Apple watch has finally justified its existence with the new version that came out this year what's so great about the new Apple watch it is larger screen on a smaller frame it has a longer battery life it has a much prettier screen and it has this ECG monitor which is kind of a first in consumer hardware as someone who has had a history of heart conditions it's quite nice to potentially be able to more regularly and passively monitor the health of my heart in a way that I could get to my doctor plus if I trip and fall it could call 999. Brilliant for me I think one of the greatest tech stories to come out of 2018 that I will remember is the Mars insight landing so the lander that we landed on Mars and I got to go and watch it land with some of the scientists who'd worked on the tech and just it's just incredible what we can do now you know we can land this incredibly sensitive instruments on a planet hundreds thousands however many miles away it is you know planned years in advance and watch it happen with an eight minute delay it's just incredible you don't even know whether it's landed when you start watching it descend like that still always gives me chills. Anyway that's it that is our final show for 2018 Alex thank you so much for helping me to relive it in all of its I think that's the last time we need to relive 2018. Let's write it out of the history books forever never speak of it. The way it went straight from action 2017 shall we just skip from 2010 to 2020 just lose the whole decade. I know try to remember the last good year that's a path we don't want to go down. A huge thanks to all of our contributors this year who helped us explain what the heck was going on with tech and of course a huge thanks to you listeners who have tuned in and kept me here in this studio. We will be back in 2019 which is next week for anyone checking the calendar. I hope you enjoy the new year's celebrations wherever you are. I'm Jordan Erica Webber thanks as always for listening. For more great podcasts from The Guardian just go to theguardian.com slash podcasts.