 The Guardian. Tech companies around the world are prepping for new data legislation that will be enforced in Europe and many are not ready. A report released Wednesday finds that about sixty percent of businesses are likely to miss the general data protection regulation compliance deadline. Only about seven percent of the companies are in full compliance as of today. Now the regulation, it's also known as GDPR, will go into effect on May 25th. On May 25th, 2018, the general data protection regulation came into force. These tougher rules on data protection were approved by the EU parliament in April 2016 but a lot of us didn't hear about them back then. Perhaps you first heard GDPR mentioned in discussions about recent controversies to do with questionable use of people's data. Or maybe it was when you started getting all those bloody emails. You know the ones. A company you haven't heard from in a while drops into your inbox with a sorry to bother you but we'd love to keep on emailing you after May 25th so if you wouldn't mind could you please read this privacy policy and tick this box. And as soon as you've dealt with that email here comes another and another. I don't know about you but I've started to ignore them. This kind of response to the last-minute barrage of emails has been dubbed GDPR fatigue. But why have so many companies left it so late to try to comply with this new regulation? And should we stop being so blase about it too? Basically what actually is GDPR? Why should we care? So suddenly reaching privacy law, reaching data processing law has gone from a bad PR move and a moderate fine from the ICO to the sort of thing that can close down your business. And could this new regulation even impact our health? The vast majority of us will need to visit a doctor at least once in our lifetime. Will GDPR affect how GPs look after us and our medical data? A lot of what they do is is already what the GDPR expects but there have been some changes that they've had to make in order to comply and be up to date with the GDPR. I'm Jordan Erica Webber and this is Chips with Everything. The one that's like, do you know a good GDPR consultant? And the other person says yes and then you're like, can I get the email address? And you go, no. To get a simple but clear explanation of what exactly GDPR is I called on my colleague Alex Hearn. I mean the most important part of the Idiots Guide to GDPR really is nothing to do with what it says you have to do and everything to do with what it says will happen if you don't. GDPR introduces a 20 million euro fine or 4% of your annual turnover whichever is higher if you breach it. So suddenly reaching privacy law, reaching data processing law has gone from a bad PR move and a moderate fine from the ICO to the sort of thing that can close down your business and it's that panic that has led to everyone's inboxes overflowing because if you are a company and you look at a database of mailing lists and all it has is a database of mailing lists if you just have a spreadsheet with 5000 email addresses in it and nothing else you have to be pretty bloody confident that you actually got every single one of those emails with the right sort of compliance and if you're not confident the easiest thing to do and the option a lot of companies have picked is just try and get that compliance after send emails out to all these people going hi we're not 100% certain that we complied with the regulations when we signed you up in the past so can you just do it again. So what's led to this then? Can you give a quick summary of how we've got to this point? I mean the short version is seven years of squabbling inside the EU about how to update the previous data protection directive the history has been actually kind of hidden underground it's been clear for about the last three years that when this was going to come it was going to be big it's been clear for the last two years that the text was set we've known what was happening and yet it's taken until I'd say three months before really for companies to actually go oh wait this is this is big and we need to act on it I think a lot of places thought maybe that there would be A safety in numbers if you leave it till the very last minute to actually make your changes and B the ability to copy what other people were doing in practice not enough people acted soon enough for the copying option to help and even the ICO dropped the ball a bit the information commissioner's office probably could have given much better guidance it's really telling that for instance on May 9th they released a myth buster which was advice to all of the companies that have been sending out all these emails going you don't need to send out all of these emails please stop sending out all of these emails you're panicking this isn't what the law tells you you have to do but they did that on May 9th right and they only issued that explicit advice after enough emails had gone out that people complained so why don't people have to send the emails then? if you have consent under pre GDPR laws to email someone that consent probably applies in post GDPR laws if you don't have consent to email someone in pre GDPR laws you shouldn't email them now like it's really it's kind of obvious common sensical when you think about it so it kind of it sounds like you're saying companies just are not ready for this at all is that true? yeah I think this is it it's also it applies to everyone and not everyone has access to legal advice or a lawyer and so you're really having to piece together from from public advice and from copying the loudest most obvious GDPR compliance that you're seeing elsewhere which is surprise surprise massive amounts of opt-in emails sent to all your mailers so this is the thing it's it's a meme like the people who are quietly complying in private no one sees the people who are doing the noisiest most active compliance efforts are the ones who everyone sees and copies and so you get this this effect where the worst practitioners set the bar okay and what industries seem to be the most affected by GDPR perhaps maybe even in what they perceive as a negative way so there's there's a few like the most obvious one are ad tech and ad targeting and to a certain extent although they are specifically applied in the regulations sort of monitoring and credit rating agencies these are companies which build up profiles about people who don't really want to have profiles built up around them ad tech and ad targeting is about profiling you to sell you things by people who have no direct relationship with you these activities are going to get harder to do in the world that GDPR has do you think that the future in like 10 or 20 years is going to look vastly different than it would have done if we didn't have GDPR? the big risk is this becomes like the EU cookie directive right which came into force a few years ago and ended up being one massive box ticking exercise put up a notification and carry on with your life as you always had done in this case even that isn't quite going to be enough one of the big things that we'll see in practice with this is just literal box ticking in other words where previously filling in your email address you'd have to uncheck the box saying I consent to marketing communications now you'll have to check the box I mean that will change quite a lot we don't yet know sort of how consumer behaviour will evolve on this but there is every chance that you know companies will see the rates of customers that they can directly contact going from I think it's around 80% down to sort of you know 15 20% of people actually opting in for marketing communications the interesting thing is the systematic effect of that will likely be to aid large market dominating companies like Google and Facebook because if you're a small company who suddenly finds that you can only email 20% of your customers rather than 80% and you want to market to them you have to market to them in other ways and one of those other ways will be handing over money to Facebook or Google to buy ads to contact your customers so you said the GDPR is a regulation in EU law right but despite Brexit despite the fact that we are planning to leave the EU the UK is still going to enforce it is that right? yeah so we are currently in the EU so from May 25th we have no choice Brexit hasn't happened yet although it's been going on forever so yeah for at least the next year we have straightforwardly no choice GDPR applies in the UK after Brexit we would theoretically have the option of opting out of it you know from March 2019 GDPR will no longer directly apply in the UK but the data protection bill which is going through parliament now and will probably come into effect before March 2019 although it might not and then it would be hilarious that will make GDPR in effect UK law but even if we didn't GDPR would still have huge ramifications in the UK because one of the biggest elements of it is its extraterritoriality which means that GDPR doesn't just cover European companies providing services to European citizens it covers European companies providing services to anyone in the world and it covers anyone in the world providing services to European citizens does that mean people outside of Europe are doing it as well then like people in the States? absolutely yeah so if you actually sit down and build your system to exclude European citizens and you are based outside of Europe you don't have to apply GDPR most places have decided that's not really worth it we've seen two big groups of people who've gone otherwise one is companies which frankly operate based on really shoddy consent mechanisms to do data processing without their customers really knowing it the other big group is companies that have just gone we can't be arsed and one of them is online games a surprising number of online games have gone actually you know what we make such little money from EU citizens running EU servers is a massive cost center our EU citizens are already completely separate from typically our Asian citizens who are the largest players of these games and our North American users who are the second largest group let's just turn off the EU service it's just not worth the hassle and so they've done it as well but if you want to work with EU citizens which you probably do if you're online because you want to work with the whole world because that's the advantage of the internet yeah you have to do it and that's what Facebook's done that's what Apple's done that's what Google's done The reason I'm asking about the UK is that earlier this week the UK Prime Minister Theresa May announced that she was pledging millions of pounds to develop artificial intelligence aimed at lowering the numbers of death from cancer the plan though would allow commercial companies to access NHS data and information on patients lifestyle information so is it possible that this would run into difficulties with GDPR? It is not only possible it is probable GDPR has a whole separate section section 9 which specifically lays out sensitive personal data including quite obviously medical data and has a whole set of extra requirements you need to do on that you really need to secure opt-in for every individual use there is no crucially there is no legitimate interest exemption there is only a serious public interest exemption it's hard to see how actually how this could be done in anything other than a very narrow very controlled way but also it's a bit of a pipe dream like I think Theresa May probably won't have to worry about GDPR conflicts anytime soon because I really doubt that any sizable AI initiative will be getting access to conventional NHS data in the next couple of years So it's likely that most of the annoying GDPR emails you've received lately are actually unnecessary and unfortunately for Theresa May her grand plans to use artificial intelligence to prevent cancer deaths will probably fall afoul of this new regulation after the break we'll look further at how GDPR could affect healthcare how can patient data be used and how have GPs been preparing for the May deadline certainly GPs and other hospital doctors have been contacting us over the past year maybe a little bit more just to try to find out a little bit more about GDPR and how they can prepare for it we'll be right back by 2050 the UK will have a net zero carbon economy that at least is what the government claims how it will achieve this is up for debate but many think nuclear energy has a major role to play does it matter that the technology is so unpopular per unit of energy produced nuclear power is safer than coal gas and even wind energy so why are we so radiophobic people have very rational fears um now they're not always justified when you you know get the guy who counters out measure things but they are rational fears and the trouble with the word is it gets used by the nuclear industry to excuse themselves so actually it is one of the safest energy technologies that we have join me ian sample on science weekly as we unpick the rationale behind our fears just search for science weekly in your podcasting app or head over to the guardian.com forward slash podcasts welcome back to chips with everything i'm jordan erica weber before the break the guardians alex hern kindly tried to explain the general data protection regulation and ended up adding to my GDPR fatigue by telling me that most of the companies who've been sending me emails probably never needed to do so in the first place but perhaps more importantly he also guessed that future plans to use artificial intelligence and big data to attempt to prevent deaths from cancer will probably face sizable barriers as a result of this new regulation. Hello is that Dr Burch? Oh hello it's Rachel Burch yes it's that jordan hi it is hi how are you not bad thank you. Dr Rachel Burch is a medical legal advisor at the medical protection society she's been advising GPs on how to prepare for GDPR earlier on alex told us that some companies were panicking about the regulation but i specifically wanted to know how the healthcare industry is coping are GPs ready for these new rules? Certainly GPs and other hospital doctors have been contacting us over the past year maybe a little bit more just to try to find out a little bit more about GDPR and how they can prepare for it so i mean in terms of GP practices and i would imagine the same for hospitals too they're already compliant with existing data protection law the data protection act 1998 and so because they're already compliant with that a lot of what they do is is already what the GDPR expects but there have been some changes that they've had to make in order to comply and and be up to date with the GDPR. Sure can you give me a rundown? So one of the main changes is the principle of accountability now this is something that was always you know quite implicit in data protection law but this is now mandatory and essentially what accountability means is that as well as actually being compliant with all the obligations that the GDPR sets practices doctors hospitals now have to demonstrate that they're actually compliant with the GDPR. So what that means is they're going to need to keep accurate records of all their data processing activities so exactly what data they process, why, what the purpose is and they've also got to be able to identify the specific lawful reason to to process this information. The other thing that they need to do is make sure that their data protection policies are all up to date and will reflect the requirements of the GDPR. Another thing is that they will have to appoint a data protection officer. This is somebody who will provide them with advice and monitor the data protection practices to make sure that you know they're doing it right. As you've kind of been covering this have you got the sense that doctors have been quite calm in the run-up to the enforcement on May 25th or do you think there's apprehension? I think there's a little bit of both. I think some doctors are quite calm and there's some that you know really are you know more worried about it and the reason for that is I think that doctors always want to do the right thing and they are so professional in their you know ethics and their ability to make sure they're on the right side of the law and they're doing everything right. So any change in legislation we tend to find can cause doctors an element of anxiety. Sure, how about have any raised any possible issues though with the new regulation? Well there are going to be some challenges regarding the day-to-day working and I think that has been something that a lot of doctors have raised with us, mainly GPs. And I think the biggest change to their day-to-day work is going to be regarding subject access requests. So this is where a patient or a third party such as a solicitor or insurance company you know with the patient's consent if they make a request for copies of medical records. Now this is something that's not new. I mean practices and hospitals are very familiar with patients making subject access requests but the time frame has been reduced for these requests to be actioned so it's gone down from 40 days to one calendar month. And another change is that practices and hospitals and you know doctors who have their own private notes they will be unable to charge for such requests. So this is quite an important issue in terms of resourcing because if there's a lot of requests coming in for copies of medical records because obviously that's every patient's right to make a request for access to their records. What about when it comes to patients? What are the main changes that patients will notice? One of the first things they'll notice I think is that when they go into their practice or into the hospital they may see a privacy notice up on the wall. And these privacy notices if there's patients who don't speak English as a first language they may find these are translated into their own languages. And there's lots that they have to say. The practices or hospitals have to say who the data controller is, who the data protection officer is, and then go on to why they're processing the data, you know their information, what the lawful basis for this is, what personal data they're actually processing, how long they're going to retain it, and they also have to make a list of the subject's rights, so the patient's rights. So the four I don't think you'd necessarily see on the wall a list of your rights as a patient or as a data subject but that's going to be a change that they will notice. What about kind of wider general practice in the UK? So outside of specific practices how could GDPR affect just like the kind of medical community generally, either positively or negatively? So for instance you talked about the data protection officer so could it create new jobs or could it maybe increase costs and the time that doctors have to spend dealing with things that have nothing really to do with patient care? It may well create jobs for data protection officers although data protection officers are going to be people who've got expertise in data protection and have a lot of familiarity with how the organisation already processes that data. So in many cases it might be an existing employee or somebody that's worked in a similar situation that would become the data protection officer and I think it will be reassuring to doctors ultimately to know that they're minimising their risk of a breach of data and hopefully give them the satisfaction that they're doing data protection well and I think it will be helpful for doctors to know that the patients will be happier too because they'll really understand how their data is being processed and they will feel confident to emphasise their rights and hopefully that will reassure them that actually doctors are taking their confidentiality seriously, they do have rights to their own data, they can see what's being written about them, they can make sure that it's accurate. All these are kind of very important principles of the GDPR and I think it's really good for patients to be able to have those rights. For our interesting tech fact this week, we're moving away from EU regulation and heading to America where reports have emerged that Amazon has been selling a facial recognition system to the police. The AI powered service called Recognition with a K can, according to Amazon itself, capture demographics and analyse sentiments for all faces in group photos, crowded events and public places such as airports and department stores. Citing concerns that this kind of surveillance poses a great threat to customers and communities already unjustly targeted in the current political climate, the ACLU, American Civil Liberties Union and other civil rights organisations have started a petition asking Amazon to, as they put it, stop padding your bottom line by selling out civil rights. I'd like to thank Alex Hearn and Dr Rachel Burch for joining me on the show this week. There'll be a link to GDPR guidelines on this week's episode description on The Guardian website. And remember, if you have any fun tech facts, questions or feedback on the show, and if you have any ideas for cool digital stories that we should cover in future episodes, email us at chipspodcast at theguardian.com. I'm Jordan Erica Webber. Thanks for listening.