 I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm incredibly excited today to get to talk to two good friends of mine, both professors at the Institute of New Economics at Oxford University, my writing partner, Eric Beinaucher, and his colleague, Don Farmer, who's a mathematician and an economist. In particular, we're going to talk to them about the economics of climate change and the way that technology is upending our orthodox understanding of that. Both are brilliant and amazing and doing some really, really interesting cutting-edge research in this field. I think you're going to really enjoy hearing from them. This is at the bleeding edge of some of the best thinking about climate change and the future. So, enjoy. I'm Eric Beinaucher. I'm a professor at the Mavatnik School of Government at the University of Oxford and the executive director of the Institute for New Economic Thinking also at Oxford. I'm Don Farmer. I'm the Bailey Gifford Professor of Mathematics and I'm also the director of Complexity Economics at the Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School. Eric and Don, so great to have you on. You guys have been doing some fascinating thinking, collaborating on the economics of climate change and the ways in which the reality of that are so different from the conventional thinking. For our listeners, I think it'd be fantastic to set the stage by describing the conventional thinking, the orthodox neoliberal or neoclassical thinking probably best anchored by William Nordhaus. Many listeners will be aware that the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow just finished up the other week and may have been very disappointed with the progress or lack of progress at that conference. We believe that part of the reason why progress has been so slow is that we've had the wrong economic ideas about this problem, about how climate change is framed. As you alluded to, Nick, we've been thinking about this problem since the 1970s and some pioneering work by Yale economist William Nordhaus, for which he won the Nobel Prize, that says that basically climate change is a giant cost benefit problem, that it's going to be very expensive and costly to transition from our fossil fuel economy to a clean energy economy, but those costs have to be weighed against the benefits of avoiding an ecological collapse and potential mass extinction event. The whole idea is we need to add up those costs, look at those future benefits of avoided disaster and chart a path between the two. Now the answer that comes out of that way of thinking and modeling the problem is basically go slow. Delay and wait as long as you can, stretch the costs out as long as you can, and try to get more information about what's going to happen in the future. But that go slow approach, as we've seen in the COP26 in Glasgow, has put us in a position where we're now already very close to the tipping point in terms of dangers to our system. Maybe just to chime in one thing, Eric, is that Nordhaus has had various, he puts a number on the target temperature rising that strikes the right balance between the costs and the benefits. This early number was quite high, the new number is around 3.1 degrees centigrade. So that's five and a half degrees Fahrenheit or so. That's a lot of warming. How do you price civilizational collapse? How does that, how do you, I'm being both glib and honest in the question, how do you calculate that? Well, and that shows that the huge disconnect between the way economists have been thinking about the problem and the way physical scientists have been thinking about it. So as Don just noted, Nordhaus's optimal warming is well above three degrees. The vast majority of climate scientists agree that would be just a complete catastrophe with irreversible changes to the climate system and major threats to ecologies and even to human civilization. And there is no way to put a price on that is the short answer. Let me say though that even among mainstream economists, Nordhaus has been criticized quite a bit for underestimating the damage function. Because really the temperature you're going to get at the end depends on how costly you think it'll be to make the transition and how severe the damage will be as a function of the temperature that we land on. And so I think most people think that Nordhaus significantly, dramatically underestimated how much destruction would happen as the temperature goes up. And so of course, that has to take into account all this stuff that's going to happen. And I don't think he did that properly. But in addition to getting the fundamental economics probably wrong, I mean, I guess what I find you guys arguing in your various pieces, and you've got this fantastic new piece out in the Democracy Journal, and you've had a piece out in Bloomberg and Washington Post. I mean, you're arguing that he even got the fundamental economics upside down, that in fact, it's cheaper, not to say better. Yeah, we're arguing that he got the sign of the effect wrong, as we would say, in physics, he got the opposite sign to the one that we think is correct. We think that converting to renewables and doing so reasonably quickly within a span of about 20 years is going to save the world money. It's going to make energy cheaper for us, as well as abating climate change. Tell us more about that. Tell us why it's going to be cheaper and how the last decades have demonstrated that. Yeah, so this goes back to some work that my group has done here at Oxford, and Chris McGee and collaborators have done at MIT, where we just collected data on technologies. You would think that we would know the history of technologies and their performance quite well, but actually that data is quite hard to come by, and is sort of scattered all over the place. So we collected some, they collected some, and so we plot over the course of time, what did it cost to perform a given function? So energy is a nice technology because the function is pretty clear. How many dollars does it cost to make a kilowatt of useful energy? And so you can look at how that's changed through time. And the answer is that technologies are very persistent. That's the first thing you see. That is, their rates of improvement are very persistent. The technology is improving at 10% per year in one decade. It's likely to improve between 5% and 15% in the next decade, and on and on and on. And so the persistence is really measured in decades and often goes quite steadily for as long as a century. So what you see is that many technologies, most technologies actually improve quite slowly. So they might improve a little bit over the course of a century, but not dramatically. But some technologies, the one we're all quite familiar with, the computers and Moore's Law can improve extremely quickly. Computers have been improving at something like 40% per year. Depends on exactly how you measure it. And interestingly, it's not just Moore's Law in that case, it's also things like hard disks have improved at 40% or 50% per year. So computers are one of the outliers. Another technology that's been improving at a fairly steady rate is solar energy. That is photovoltaic solar energy, solar cells. And since their advent in 1958, where solar cells were first used for the Vanguard satellite, they've been improving at roughly that rate ever since. Meanwhile, other energy technologies like fossil fuels have hardly changed over the course of 140 years. That is, prices go up and down. So they're volatile. But the overall long range trend is pretty flat. And similarly, nuclear power, since its advent, actually almost exactly at the same time as solar energy, nuclear power has only gone up in price. Although it's slightly complicated in Korea, it's gone down at an extremely slow rate, maybe 1% per year, which is quite slow. And so there's very low likelihood that nuclear power will go down in the future. But the main point being that because we see these persistent trends, it's a pretty good bet that they'll keep going. Now, one thing that they depend on is deployment. This is somewhat controversial. But the more we make of something, the better we understand how to make it and the cheaper it gets. And the relationship that governs that is something called Wright's Law by Theodore Wright, who quite an interesting figure, was head of US aviation production during at least for part of World War II. But before that, in 1936, he observed that if you take a given type of plane in a given factory that the cost of the plane to produce the plane goes down by 20% every time cumulative production of that plane doubles. So that law turns out to hold for many other technologies as well, although with varying percentages. And it holds quite well for solar energy. And so our prediction is that if we continue on the rapid rate of deployment we have for solar energy, it's been going up for 40% per year for many decades now, then if we continue on that rate of deployment that within 10 years, solar energy, wind, another technology that's been increasing in deployment at an exponential rate and going down at a similar rate as a function of deployment, wind, batteries, similar track record, and hydrogen-based fuels like ammonia, that those four technologies are the key technologies that are going to be players in the green energy transition. And if they continue to behave as they have in the past, and if we can just keep them on their same deployment rates for another 10 to 20 years, actually for 10 years for the first two, because that's all it takes for them to become dominant, then we're going to see energy cheaper than it's ever been. Just to clarify a couple of things. So despite the fact that coal and oil have been around for, well, 100 years, maybe longer. Longer. 100, well. Yeah. I mean, for a long time, for many, many, many decades, they effectively cost the same amount per kilowatt hour today as they did 50 years ago or 100 years ago. Yes. Once you account for inflation, then the price of oil is about what it was 100 years ago, similarly with coal. And of course, it fluctuates by factors of two or three. There are periods where oil goes up and there's periods where it goes down, but the long-range trend is pretty flat. We should note that this is not to say there hasn't been technology improvements in those areas. There has been a lot of technology advance in oil, gas, coal mining, et cetera. But we, or the data seems indicate that those advances have gone more into developing new sources of supply, going from easy onshore oil to tight oil, offshore, Siberian oil, so on, rather than delivering sustained cost declines. Because the technology advances and when solar batteries have resulted in more efficiencies and cost declines have been passed on to consumers. And it is true that today, utility-scale solar is cheaper, cheaper than all of the fossil fuel alternatives, isn't it? Well, it depends a bit on your geographic location. But it's certainly in sunny places now, it's cheaper. And as the costs continue to come down, our rule of thumb is that the locations that are in the 95th percentile of solar, meaning it's most expensive, they're going to be, after a decade, they should be roughly where the 5th percentile places are now. It depends on where you live, what's more expensive. But in another decade, it's going to be pretty uniformly cheaper. We should be clear that we're approaching this tipping point where renewables plus storage from batteries and from liquid fuels becomes cheaper and better than the fossil fuel economy. And we're kind of approaching that tipping point now. We still have a long way to go. Only about 20% of global energy is from non-fossil fuels today, 80% from fossil fuels. But the growth has been extraordinary. Renewable capacity was up 45% in 2020. The only energy sources actually grow during the pandemic. And 90% of new power additions in the world now in the electrical sector are from renewables. So this is all good news. But it's still not happening fast enough to get us on the pathway to net zero and contain warming according to the Paris targets. And there are many barriers to getting this stuff out faster. We need more investment flows. We need policy support. There's issues with developing the grids and ensuring there's enough storage capacity and so on. So there's a huge amount of good news in these cost declines that the DONE was talking about. But it's a race against the clock. I'd like to interject a little bit of a correction. And that actually, if we can just stay on the improvement rates that we've been on for solar and wind, we're going to get there in a decade and we are going to hit the Paris Agreement. The question is, can we do that? Or the forces, are there going to be blockages that will keep us from doing that, like resistance from fossil fuel companies? I think the key place where we have to really put our pedal to the floor is in storage technologies, long-term storage. So the weakest track record of the four technologies that I mentioned, that is solar, wind, batteries, and hydrogen-based fuels are the hydrogen-based fuels. So we need to get those costs down. And we need to keep them on the 60% per year deployment rate that they're on. And they need to stay on that for another 15 years or so to get us where we need to go. So if we can just do that, we're there. And this is where policy and politics starts to make a big difference, doesn't it? Because if we were not in a race for time, then we would have nothing to worry about, right? Because the fundamental dynamics of these technological improvements are going to put the oil companies out of business eventually full stop. That effectively can't not happen, right? But the truth is we are in a race for time, that we have to get there quick. And that's where policy and politics comes in. And I'd love for you guys to discuss this new strategy for climate, which is making the clean stuff cheap. Yeah, I know exactly. It is a race against time. And again, despite the good news trends in terms of cost and deployment that Joan was talking about, there's a huge amount of momentum and existing installed capacity and political power in the existing fossil fuel system. So this tipping point won't happen fast enough without a significant push from policy. And we should also note some of the barriers are things like issues with how the grid is run and operated that fall squarely in the purview of governments or common infrastructure like charging points for electric vehicles and things like that. We need to convert pipelines from oil to ammonia. We need, as Eric said, we need to have a build out. We estimate the grid needs to be built out by like a factor of four over the next 30 years. So we need to really dramatically expand the grid. And it's all doable, but it is going to require policy and coordinated government action to make those things happen. Can I ask a clarifying question? And I feel stupid asking it, but I suspect that some of our listeners will also have it, which is what do you mean by ammonia? This is something new to me. Yeah. So ammonia is the stuff that people use to clean things, but it also burns. And it's a fuel that without carbon is a fuel that you can easily make from electricity and water. And unlike hydrogen, which is an extremely light and very volatile gas, so it's hard to handle and tough to store. If you just put hydrogen out in the air, it just evaporates and goes off into outer space. So like gravity doesn't hold it down. But ammonia is, you know, it's a liquid kind of like petroleum. Ammonia is a convenient fuel and ammonia is not the only possibility. You can make several other fuels that are hydrogen based that can be made in a carbon neutral way. While solar and wind are graded at generating electricity, there's many applications that need liquid fuels that also need heating. And also you need to be able to store the electricity generated by wind and solar because the sun and wind don't blow all the time. So we'll need a combination of storage technologies, you know, including utility scale batteries, but also these liquid fuel capabilities. So with electricity and water, you can make ammonia, correct? Yeah. And with ammonia, you could run a car. Yeah. Yeah. For vehicles, you know, it's looking for most like passenger vehicles, you know, it's looking most likely that the electric cars with battery technologies, you know, work very well, but, you know, certain kinds of large scale, heavy machinery, factory operations, industrial processes, you know, lots of other tankers and ships. And we're going to need, you know, like, you know, renewable liquid fuels for aircraft and things like that. So you know, electricity and batteries can get a big chunk of the problem, but not all the problem. Okay. So let's talk about making the clean stuff cheaper rather than the bad stuff more expensive. Yeah. So for about the past 30 years, again, you know, initiated by, you know, Nordhaus's work, you know, the strategy that economists focused on was, well, climate change is what economists call an externality, a form of pollution, where somebody is creating a cost that they aren't bearing, but society as a whole is bearing. And the textbook economics answer to that is to put a price on it, you know, to tax it, create a pollution tax or a market where you can trade permits to pollute. And that approach was tried in other areas of environmentalism, most famously for reducing acid rain, sulfur dioxide emissions in the US, and it was actually very successful. So many economists thought this was the, you know, the logical approach for climate change that we should have a carbon tax or what's called a cap and trade market, where you have permits to emit carbon that are then reduced over time and you trade them, creating a price for it. And it's a, you know, it's a very elegant answer in theory, but it hasn't really worked in progress and in reality. We've been trying to implement carbon prices around the world for the last 30 years. And the World Bank estimates that today, you know, after all this effort, only about 0.8% of global emissions are under any kind of effective carbon tax. And this is despite the fact that actually a growing number of countries have carbon prices, about 60 countries in the world do today. But the big problem with them is political, that when carbon taxes or carbon prices are proposed or implemented, there's huge pushback from fossil fuel and industrial interest, as we put it, the dirty stuff doesn't want to be made more expensive, so it fights back. And those interests have a lot of political power. So in... Well, and if I could just say, and consumers. Yeah, and consumers... And the majority of consumers paid it too. Yeah, and, you know, politically, it's a very powerful argument. You tell people, oh, your energy bill is going to go up or you're going to pay more for gas for your car. And listeners may be familiar with what we're called the Gilets Jeunes, protests in French. People are wearing yellow vests who came out in the streets in their tens of thousands because they were going to increase gas taxes to pay for climate initiatives. So that makes it very, very hard politically to implement these schemes. And then even if they do, like Europe has had its emissions trading scheme for over a decade now, what tends to happen is the lobbyists get ahold of it and they just ensure that carbon prices so low that it has almost no effect. So the European trading scheme, for example, only studies estimate reduced emissions by about 3%, again, despite all this effort and political capital invested. Yeah, it's definitely a long slog to do that. And politically, it couldn't be a harder thing to accomplish. Exactly. Well, if someone were going to implement a $75 a ton carbon tax in the US tomorrow, we'd be the first people to cheer. But again, it's not going to happen. And interestingly, some listeners may have heard that an Exxon lobbyist was caught on secret videotape by an environmental group confessing to the fact that the fossil fuel companies actually support proposals for carbon taxes because they know how politically toxic they are. Right. So it's a very cynical, very cynical strategy. So instead, we propose a pivot to a strategy we call make the clean stuff cheap and widely available and use policies that can drive the deployment of more renewable technologies to accelerate the cost declines that we talked about and also to make the investments in infrastructure that are required to make a high renewable system work and also to remove the other barriers that stand in the way for deploying these clean technologies. Right. And so just playing this back to you in political talk, it's just way easier to give people a new cheaper thing than it is to make the existing thing that they are using more expensive. You know, like it's just what one is a relatively easy political cell and the other is a nightmare. You know, and I've watched the environment, you know, the sort of the climate change political community hit their heads against this brick wall again and again and again and again and fail because they're expecting the majority of citizens, most of whom are hanging on economically by their fingernails to subordinate their own near term economic self-interest to save the polar bears. Right. Which people will not do. They just will not do it. Exactly. You know, well, you know, polls show that people increasingly do care a lot about climate change in the environment. The latest Yale study shows something like 70 percent in the US do. But when it comes down to the kitchen table issues, telling someone their commute to work is going to get more expensive. They don't like that. Yeah. But if instead, you know, is anyone who's driven one of these wonderful modern electric cars knows they are better cars. They're just great cars. And if you tell people that said we're going to give you cheaper, better electric cars and we're going to give you plenty of places around where you can easily charge them and so on. Yeah. And you'll you'll never have to spend money on gasoline again. You'll never have to get an oil change. Your maintenance costs will be lower. You know, and these things go really fast. You know, people will like that. Or likewise, you know, if we can get these very high levels of deployment of renewables and drive the cost down, you know, people will see their electric utility bills drop. Yeah. You know, which is a good thing. And people have already started to see some of these benefits. You know, LED lighting, for example, has become, you know, very cheap now. And it's just better lighting. Who likes to change light bulbs all the time. Plus, you can make them different colors and things like that. So it's better for consumers. And it also creates new economic and political interest because the company is making the electric vehicles, making solar turbines, making the LED lights. Their voice starts to get heard in the political system. That's right. And the company can start to be deployed politically too, against the fossil fuel industries. Yeah. You know, stepping back a bit, you know, the way we think about this whole problem, again, you know, very different from where we started with the conventional economics and nord houses, it's not a big cost benefit problem. It's a problem of economic transformation. So the transition to the clean energy economy is more like the industrial revolution. You know, you're changing the technologies, changing the energy systems, changing the way we live. And we know from history that we do have these regime changes. You know, there's not a lot of companies making whale oil anymore, you know, or Buckywips. And if these new technologies do get cheaper and better and widely deployed, you know, our future generations will be reading about oil companies in their history books. They won't exist anymore. But again, we have to drive this, this industrial technological transformation faster than it would happen just on its own. I don't know how much the best utility grade solar costs per kilowatt today, but in 10 years at the current course and speed, how much cheaper will it be than it is today? Well, just as a reference point, in about 15 years between 2005 and 2020, solar drops 22 fold. Incredible. And what does that imply 20 years out? I mean, it would be 90% cheaper than it is today, 20 years out. Yeah. Well, the curve is likely to flatten. This is debated. But the reason the curve would flatten is that in about 10 years, solar becomes the dominant technology. So right now it can improve, it can increase at 40% per year because it's knocking other technologies, it's taking over their territory. And it's still a relatively small fraction of the total. But in 10 years, it starts to become a substantial fraction, like 50% of the total. And then it has to flatten out. And the rate of growth of energy in general, total energy, useful energy is around 2% per year. So the growth will eventually flatten to around 2% per year. And when that happens, we will likely move down the learning curve more slowly than we are now. And so it won't drop in price as fast as it has been dropping, although we'll see. Yeah, I mean, but we are looking at, I mean, if we don't annihilate ourselves in between here and there, a future with an astonishing amount of abundant clean energy. Yeah. And to do a lot of really cool things with. Yeah. No, you know, we, our team estimates that, you know, if we go through what we call a decisive transition, you know, where we have a big push to accelerate the deployment that Joan was talking about, that that could save the world about 27 trillion in energy costs versus the costs of the fossil fuel economy that we have today. So we would have both abundant and cheaper energy. Now, you know, one thing that many, many listeners may wonder about is, as, you know, we talk about getting to higher and higher levels of renewables, this is, you know, again, everyone knows that sun doesn't always shine, the wind doesn't blow, you know, how reliable would that kind of an electricity system be? Would we still need nuclear or some fossil fuel on the grid? And yeah, this is an area of debate, but around the world, different utilities are getting more experience with higher and higher levels of renewables. And we're finding that is the engineers get working on these issues that, you know, combinations of storage and renewables and, you know, and other sources of power, hydro and geothermal and so on can combine to create very reliable grids that can get to zero carbon. And you know, nuclear, you know, our view is where it exists today, it should be run as long as it's safe and economical to do so. That is, though, noted earlier, the costs of nuclear have been increasing over time, whereas that are now substantially more expensive than renewables. So in terms of adding new nuclear capacity, unless there's some real major technological breakthrough that changes that equation, it doesn't make sense to be adding large amounts of new nuclear capacity. Yeah, cool. So we always ask this question at the end of our podcast. If you guys were benevolent dictators and could just decide what the world should do to address these problems, what would you do? If I was a benevolent dictator, the policy I'd like to see implemented globally is what I call carbon abolition, a sunset clause for fossil fuels that by a fixed date, you know, say 2035 in the developed world and 2050 in the developing world, that we're just not going to allow the burning of fossil fuels in a way that has emissions. Fossil fuels that have some carbon capture and storage would still be allowed, but nothing that would be emitting. And having that as a fixed date and fixed in law would be a huge signal to the rest of the economy. You've got to get your skates on and start this transition now. And it would be a huge spur to drive the deployments of clean energy technologies and innovation that we've been talking about. And it would give huge certainty to the capital markets that that's where you want your money to go. How about you, Don? Well, I would agree with that. I would do the same thing. I think the only thing I would add is I would also provide substantial support for methods of storing energy. These are called actually P2X fuels like ammonia that you can make from hydrogen to try and get the cost of that down as quickly as possible, the put in place, the infrastructure for storing it, for moving it around the planet where it's needed and moving energy around, as well as building really good grid technology so that we can move energy around the planet and not form. So I put both the carrot and the stick. Eric gave the stick. I'd also put out some carrots. Yeah, I love it. I love it. And finally, Don, you go first and then you, Eric, why do you do this work? Well, I do it. I do it because I love it, but I want to do something good for the world. And I actually, like 15 years ago when I was at the Santa Fe Institute, we had some people come up from the NREL, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and to help them think out of the box about what to do. And I could see that the main thing that all this depended on was how the cost of technologies are going to change in time. And so I've been doggedly researching that question since then. And it's very nice to see that paying off in terms of an understanding of technological change that'll benefit not just the green energy transition, but lots of other areas as well. And of course, it's always nice when you can predict things. Yeah, it's fantastic. How about you, Eric? For me, it's pretty simple. I'd like future generations to be able to flourish on and enjoy this beautiful blue planet that we're the stewards of. I couldn't agree more. So Eric and Don, thank you so much for being with us. This is so fantastic. And thank you for your work. It's both important and fascinating. Thanks so much, Nick. It's been a real pleasure. Yeah, thanks for me. I appreciate you getting the word out there.