 Hey Pitchfork Economics gang, we are doing another AMA Ask Me Anything episode. And so if you have a question about something, ideally economics related, leave us a voicemail by calling 731-388-9334 and Goldie and I will answer your questions. Employment has not fully recovered for women since the start of the pandemic. Childcare is not a personal problem. It's an economic issue. And we have a child care crisis. It's unavailable and it's unaffordable. Women lost their jobs relative to men at a three to one ratio. 100% effectively of the kids having to stay home explains a lot of that. It is a abject failure that the government has bailed out airlines and has not bailed out moms. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. There's some good news and some bad news about the post pandemic economy, Nick. Which do you want first? You want the good news? Always give me the bad news first. Well, you know what, I'm going to give you the good news first. The good news is that employment has fully recovered, in fact, past full recovery. And the bad news is that that's only for men. That employment has not fully recovered for women since the start of the pandemic. Yeah. And I think the ratio I heard was women lost their jobs relative to men at a three to one ratio. And that, of course, 100% effectively of the kids having to stay home explains a lot of that. You know, and it's still, you know, child care is in crisis across the country. And women are women in our society, mothers in our society in particular are taking the brunt of that. Right. We already had an uneven and unfair division of labor before the pandemic in which women were picked up much more the responsibility for child care and for housework and so forth. And since the pandemic, after the temporary closures of school, but the permanent closure of many childcare centers that have not been able to reopen, partially because they can't find childcare workers to fill the jobs. It's gotten even worse. That's right. Well, and kids under five still haven't been vaccinated, which creates another layer of worry. And, you know, right. So what was a terrible situation before the pandemic has since become a crisis. Fortunately, we have a guest who has a big bold idea on how to address it. That's true. Our guest Reshma Sujani has introduced a Marshall plan for moms. And we're going to hear a lot about what that plan is and why it's necessary in our interview with her. My name is Reshma Sujani. Well, I'm the founder and CEO of the Marshall plan for moms and the founder of Girls Who Code and the author of Pay Up the Future of Women and Work and why it's different than you think. I've spent more than a decade building movements fighting for women and girls empowerment and working to close the gender gap in tech. So Reshma, tell us what inspired you to create the Marshall plan for moms. Yeah, look, I mean, I found myself in the beginning of 2020 as the CEO of Girls Who Code, we had just had a Super Bowl ad. I was going to teach more girls to code than I ever had before. I was having my second child and I was really excited to take my paternity leave and then the pandemic hit. And I found myself having to go back to work a few weeks after my son was born, homeschool my kindergartner and save my nonprofit from being shut down because the first resources to go in crises are to women and girls. And my entire leadership team was mostly women of young children. And really, through my lived experience, through their experience, saw the fact that so many women because of the pandemic had to start supplementing their paid labor for unpaid labor. So when the schools shut down, mothers became the primary ones that were homeschooling their kids. And so in that December of 2020, you started to see millions and millions of women get pushed out of the workforce. And when we started the pandemic, women were the majority. I remember thinking like you can't lose that many jobs that quickly and not have a plan. And so the Marshall plan for moms really started to be a part of the process. And I remember my mom was sitting in the middle of my bedroom and she was sitting in the middle of my bedroom. And I was just sitting in the middle of my bedroom and just writing in a bed, which I often do when I see something that needs fixing. And it was basically just like what me and my PTA moms needed to get back to work. You know, we needed to pay leave, we needed affordable child care, we need schools to open up safely, we needed retraining for those of us who had lost the pandemic. Well, obviously we did go into this without a plan and there were devastating consequences. Describe what happened in 2020 and 2021. You know, 30 years of progress of women's workforce participation were wiped out basically in nine months. So over 12 million women over the course of the pandemic left the workforce due to the pressures of taking care of children and their families as the pandemic stretched on. You know, now two years later, America's moms are still not okay. And that's because the ratio of caregiving work hasn't shifted. You know, America does these time and use surveys and two thirds of caregiving work are done by women. So now two years after the pandemic, we still have 1.1 million women that are missing from the labor force that were there two years ago. You know, women of color have been hit especially hard. You know, one in three women are considering leaving the workforce or changing their jobs. The great resignation is literally led by women and 51% of women say that their mental health has declined and the rates of anxiety and depression have skyrocketed. Okay. How many men have left the workforce? Men have gained all their jobs. They're back where they were pre-pandemic levels. Okay. Interesting. So what's the Marshall Plan? Well, the Marshall Plan for moms is, you know, a nonprofit that is pushing for public and private strategies to make sure that workplaces work for women. It has three legs. You know, we do culture change and thought leadership work. We do work to really shift the private sector and the public sector. And then finally, we organize moms to ask for what they need. So right now, a few weeks ago, we launched the National Business Child Care Coalition. So if you look at the latest jobs report, right, you still have about 700,000 women that are missing, you know, from the workforce. And some gains have been made because employers are allowing for flexibility in remote working. So in the knowledge worker sector, you know, you're still seeing, you're seeing women can start coming back. But in the manufacturing sector, for example, the Midwest, because you can't work from home and half of our daycare centers are still shut down, you haven't seen, you know what I mean? Pre-pandemic levels. And so the number one reason why women are not back and why mothers are not back in the workforce is because of our broken child care center. Half our daycare centers are still shut down, you know, the business model of child care is broken. And the government is refusing, right, to do something about it by passing the bill that would have put a ceiling of 7% on the amount the family spend. And so it's really up to the private sector. So I've been building a coalition to get private companies to start subsidizing and paying for child care benefits so women can come back to work. So make the case to business owners why they would want to provide and or subsidize child care. Well, child care is not a personal problem. It's an economic issue. And we have a child care crisis, it's unavailable, and it's unaffordable. And if there's 4.5 million people that are quitting every month and millions of jobs that are open, the only way that parents and particular mothers can come back to work is if they have childcare. And right now, it costs more for companies to pay for turnover than it would for them to pay for childcare. And they're paying for egg freezing, they're paying for museum memberships. And it's time to pay us and help us out with child care. You literally can't work without it. You know, it's funny, Amazon, in Seattle, their headquarters has doggy daycare. Thank you for that wonderful story that I'm going to tell to everyone. I don't I don't know. They don't have they don't. Yeah, they don't. Yeah, people can bring their dogs to work. And there's areas that drop them off, but not not your child. I'm wondering if you're torn a little bit by this. I mean, obviously, the government has failed to provide childcare the way most other advanced countries have. But we also have this system of employer provided health care, which is terrible. And, and I wonder if you're torn between, you know, about going down that path and trying to encourage employer provided childcare, whether that's going to lead us to the same sad situation. Well, I feel like it has to be a both and right. It can't just be the well, first of all, we can't do nothing. That that is not an option. We have to do something. And the two, you know, most, you know, obvious actors are either the government or the private sector. And you know, you need the government because the government will make sure that everyone is covered. And I think you need the private sector because you need innovation. So I think that part of the problem here is, like I said, is the business model of childcare is broken. And there's not enough entrepreneurs that are going into what we call the fam tech space and thinking about like, what is the, you know, what's the childcare model of the 21st century of the future that we're not even thinking about, right? How can we do this differently? And so I think that when you have multinational companies that are starting to pay for childcare, you have more, you know, entrepreneurs that want to go into the space and start thinking about how to disrupt it. And that's when you get economies of scale. And that's when you, you know, and I, we were, yeah, I'm just gonna push back on that hard. I just don't, I just don't think that technology or business processes are going to come to the rescue here. The business community has externalized the costs of childcare onto the society in the way that they externalize all the all the other costs, including the reasonable cost of paying their workers enough to get by without government assistance. I absolutely agree with you. Listen, I don't think that the private sector is the answer to this. And it is a abject failure that the government has bailed out airlines and has not bailed out moms. It's an abject failure that, you know, we don't, you know, we literally do not, I mean, you just have the baby formula shortage. If you want to understand, if you want to have a, you know, a view about how we care about our mothers, just look at what happened there. But the thing is, is that we can't wait for them to grow a heart. But they're never going to grow a heart. Like, can we please just stipulate that the idea that companies are going to solve this problem is fantasy. It's just not going to happen. So what's the action? That require it by force of law. No one is going to solve this problem willingly. Companies will be required to pay for childcare in the same way they are required to pay Social Security benefits and a variety of other things in the absence of being compelled to do so. They will not in all but the smallest circumstances, there are of course, some industries and companies that are so lucrative and are so desperate for the highest quality, you know, rare work that they will pay for this. But just in broad terms, it's not, it's not realistic. I'm just incredibly cynical that you can get anywhere by exhorting people to do the right thing. I think you have to I don't think that that's but I don't think that's the argument I'm making. I think that right now, it's like, for example, you know, when my parents came to this country as refugees, you know, both of them had worked for the same company for 30 years. You know, both my parents bosses knew my name came to my high school graduation. It was a family, you know, it was about family and people stayed. And now because we've treated employees like crap, not invested in their families, not invested in their kids, not invested in them, people leave every eight, nine months. I don't think so. We're in violent agreement about that. We're in violent agreement. So I think that there's a moment because of the great resignation, because there's so many open jobs, where actually, we as parents have a little bit of leverage. And I think one example of where you're seeing this is in, you know, in 22 states for the first time ever, women without children are making more than men, because they've gone in and said, all right, you want, you want to fill those jobs? I want to know what he makes, and I want double and your office to. And so it is a moment, I'm not saying it's going to last for long, where I'm not saying the companies are doing the goodness of their heart. But I think they could be doing it, they haven't we have an opportunity to push them to do it, because it makes business sense, because it's cheaper than the cost of their attrition. A great example of that of this is Etsy. You know, Etsy's been basically providing childcare, Patagonia. Again, I'm not going to come up with 100 examples, that's the problem, right? But the ones that you have, have actually made the business case. Right. So they're not doing it because it's the nice thing to do, it's just it's it's save the money. I mean, I guess if they really understood their own rational self interest, I can't think of anything that would lead to employee retainment, like providing childcare, because your employees would not want to pull their children out of childcare that they like. Yeah. But as the only business person on the call, let me assure you, that is not how we fucking think. Okay, we are not, we're just not that sophisticated. And so, you know, look, it rest my the other the other thing, the thing that you did not say about what happened to your parents when you came to the United States as refugees, is that in that day, it only took one median worker 30 weeks of work to pay for all of the basic expenses to support a family. And today, it takes something like 53 weeks of work to do the very same thing, which is why every married woman in America needs to have a job because in the absence of it, you will not be able to support your family. And I don't in any way want to push back on your basic thesis, which is we treat women like crap. No, I think you have a lot. I mean, you have you I'm I because I have to because I've lost all my hope in government. I need to have open somebody. Yeah, I mean, and I'm not and I want to be clear to that. I don't think that the private sector is the answer. I think in this moment, you know, and we've been able to do, you know, we can make it make the case. And, and we'll see how much right now less than 10% of companies offer some sort of childcare. But so actually, ironically, even the company, right, Amazon has a doggy daycare, but not childcare. So even in ones that can afford to do it, you know, so so we have to we have to make the case and continue to push my big though, my big point of this, I think is that I'm trying to take moms from rage to power. We need to start mobilizing mothers, women in the workplace to start demanding this, not continuing to breastfeed in closets and like, hi, children and and tolerate the motherhood penalty, right, which is being paid less for men for doing the exact same job just because you're a mother. And so there's pieces of this that all have to kind of come together in this moment, but it has to. Let's talk about these pieces a little more beyond just childcare. What are the other pillars of your Marshall Plan for moms? So, you know, the first which is about flexibility and remote working, right, and predictability for hourly workers, right? You work at Walmart, and, you know, you basically have a kid, you you pay for childcare, you show up for your 7pm shift, it's canceled, you're out money. And so the importance of having predictability and flexibility is is critical paid leave. You know, again, the United States is the only industrialization that doesn't offer paid leave. You know, many companies love to tout their paid leave policies, but they also gaslight men when they take it. So it's not enough just to offer paternity leave, you have to basically incentivize I think men to take it. The majority of men take less than 10 days off after having a baby. And look, my big aha from the pandemic was that unless you have gender equality at home, you're not going to have gender equality in the workplace. And unless you build workplaces for single moms, you know, you are never going to get to equality. And so this is about structural change, right, you just structurally change society in workplaces to make it possible to work and have a child. And I think that some of the tenants of that are childcare, paid leave, support for our mental health, and just, you know, basically having the permission to control your day in a way that acknowledges that you just did two and a half jobs at home before you came to work. Yeah. 100%. You say that, that, you know, you've lost faith in government to address these things, a lot of these things would be, you know, like in Seattle, we have paid leave and secure scheduling, not just for women for men, but obviously, the workforce it's aimed at is predominantly female, I should say, I've lost faith in the federal government. I think that there's still I know where you're going. Yeah, I mean, listen, I mean, Massachusetts, New York on paid leave, I mean, they've it's been it's been game changing for women of color. So I think we have to look to the states, quite frankly, to take care of their basics. But you know, the thing is, all of this is interconnected. You know, when you think about Roe v. Wade, six out of 10 women who get an abortion are mothers, 50% of women who get abortions already have a child. It's, you know, it's because you can't force birth in a country that doesn't have paid leave affordable childcare, you know, I mean, basic investments that make it possible for you to even have a child, you know, that's connected to the baby formula shortage, you know, that wasn't a priority. So we have no shame in seeing women literally scour, you know, aisles and Walmart. In fact, you've had to have a, you know, a network of women who are helping other mothers get, you know, tell them where the baby formula is, instead of this, I mean, abject failure, you know, you will happen in your velve last week, right, where you have the number one cause of death now for children are guns. And so we are living in a society that is as broken in terms of family values, we don't take care of families anymore, where it's where it's in keep more incapable of doing it. So something has to change. Can I plant one idea in your head? Yes, because we our team at Civic Ventures has thought, as carefully as we know how about the childcare crisis. And, of course, not everyone lives in cities, but most Americans live in cities. And one of the huge pressures on childcare in most places is real estate, like where to where to put like where to put the childcare places. And it turns out that the places where the most people actually physically work is the place where it is most expensive to rent space for childcare. Right. I mean, just it's just a natural function of the way in which real estate concentrates and works. So I think, you know, my view is that a big thrust of any solution is to require large landlords to put aside reasonable amounts of space effectively for free for childcare in every place, every place. So there is no earthly reason why giant office buildings don't have half a floor devoted to childcare in every single one. So this is what we've been doing with our business coalition. So we have a handful of companies that are now turning their open office space into building childcare centers. It's exactly what you said. It didn't make sense from a business perspective before, but now you have all this open space. People are not coming back to work five days a week. So you want to know what's a good way of getting parents to come back into the office? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I like, in my mayor, I was like, you know, instead of you should be having these companies build childcare centers, like, let people work from home. Right? Like, who cares? Right. But have them, you want to do something you want to do something with that space to something for our kids. And I think that's absolutely right. And the other part of this from a data perspective is I bet you if you look at Disney, Google places that have actually have childcare centers on site, they too have lower attrition. No, it has to be the case. It has to be the case. So what else should we do? I think that we have to really, some of this feels to me as I've is it's just deeply cultural. Right. It's deeply embedded in American culture. Like, even when you know, we think about childcare as a personal problem, or families as a personal problem that you have to solve. And we have to really just deeply, deeply reconsider, you know, how culturally we've looked at the role of women, the role of mothers in society, and acknowledge that it's broken. You know, every time women take 10 steps forward, we pull them back 10 steps. You know, any society that takes away rights from people is a declining democracy. And that's just about what we're about to do. And it's in and so we need to, I think, really examine this. And, and this is where I think, you know, people always say to me, well, what do men say about this? I was like, you know, men want the exact same thing I want. You know, it's been two years, people have spent more time with their kids, they've taken their stuff to school, played soccer with them, they have lower diabetes, heart attack issues, like it's good for society when both genders partake in caretaking. And so men are not the problem. But I think that we have an opportunity here for men to really stand up. Actually, I actually do know some men who are the problem. Some men are the problem. Thank you. And men as a species. Yeah. But it's interesting. Like, for example, you know, I've talked to lots of employers about this, you know, even if you're a 55 year old, you know, who works in a bank and doesn't want to commute, you're not saying that to your employer, because you'll be gaslit. You know, and so we need men to really speak out more about the structural changes that we need to make that will benefit the lives of women, but that will also benefit their lives. Yeah, so I'd be very interested if you could articulate what like, if you were in charge of you put politics aside, how would you deal with the nuts and bolts, the child care challenge the nation faces? How what would you do? How would you organize it? Well, I think the first part is we have to acknowledge that someone needs to pay the subsidy. And so I think what Biden had proposed to do and build back better, which was like, you know, have a ceiling at 7% was a good idea. I also love Elizabeth Warren's idea about having universal child care. Like, it doesn't make sense, right, that we have K through 12 education, and we don't have universal child care, when we know that so much of your development begins at the earliest of possible ages. And so, you know, we should be providing childcare, quite frankly, for everybody in this country. So but has your team thought through the particulars? You know, like, who pays? Where are the facilities, etc. I mean, you mean from a government solution or private sector? I don't care, whatever you want to do right now, we're focused on a private sector solution. And what we're doing is convening companies together to say, what are you doing? What works for you? So for example, you know, we have a company fast retailing, which provides, you know, childcare subsidies, not just to salary workers, but hourly workers. And so we are connecting them to other retail organizations who didn't think that they could actually provide childcare benefits to store managers, because it didn't make it, you know, it didn't make economic sense. So part of it is sharing that same thing with Etsy and Patagonia that are leading the way in tech, you know, in both paid leave benefits and childcare benefits, how they basically mandated that both men and women take it at the same rate, the effect of that in terms of gender equality in their family. So we're in a period of like, I'm not rolling out what the gold standard is yet, because I don't know. And I think what we need to do is like look at the shining examples of companies that are actually doing it, and sharing that with one another. And just shifting the conversation that I think the knee jerk is that, well, it just doesn't make economic sense. It's not an economic problem. It's a personal problem. That is fundamental before you say, okay, here's the childcare model of the future that I think everybody should implement. Yeah. But as you look around internationally, what's the gold standard? Well, I mean, the gold standard is more investment to families, right? Like the United States, I think what the average is, is it spends $500 per family for childcare. I think the average industrialization spends $14,000. So, you know, it's more, I mean, you look at Canada, I mean, both Canada and the UK did not have the same number of women leaving the workforce during the pandemic, because they had universal childcare and paid leave. Do the businesses you talk to, do they understand that if they're facing a labor shortage, this is the low hanging fruit, bringing women back into the workforce by taking care of the needs that are keeping them out of the workforce? And the businesses that we've spoken to, I think they get that because that's the conversation that they're having, you know, those, that's the segment of the population in their workforce that has not come back, it's mothers. I mean, there's a million surveys or studies that basically demonstrate why, you know, we just did a study with McKinsey where we surveyed 1000 parents, the 50% of the women who left the workforce was because of childcare. And the fact that it was unavailable, where my babysitter was putting my daycare center shut down, oh, there's another variant here, no school's gonna be closed. And it was just impossible to work and have a child. So I think they know that if they're going to have that talent, they have to solve that problem. I don't, I think the idea of the private sector providing childcare benefits is not controversial. You know, an example of this, quite frankly, is fertility benefits. You know, I write about this in my book five years ago, a handful of companies, nobody was offering to pay for your IVF, but people started coming in, men and women saying, what are your fertility benefits? What are your fertility benefits? What are your fertility benefits? And in the middle of a talent war, it became a benefit that people cared about and would go to a company over. That's what the survey we did with McKinsey demonstrates about childcare. People are forum shopping for companies that have good family benefits right now. So I think that companies who understand this, you know, are going to do the right thing. The deeper problem here, though, for me, that I get frustrated and upset about is what is up with society? You know, when you think about the agitate, there are more parents that are agitated about critical race theory and LGBTQ stories in schools, or now even having mental health centers in their schools that are agitated about the fact that childcare centers are shut down, or that they don't have paid leave, or that, you know, I'm saying that we are focused on the wrong things. And to me, we have to ask ourselves, why? Why, why, why? And how do you shift that? Yeah, it is. I mean, well, there actually is a socio psychological answer to this, which is that we are wired to care about one thing more than the other, but that does not serve the society well. Well, I also think we've lost our sense of community. I mean, it's ironic, a lot of the pushback I get on childcare benefits are from childless women who say, well, why should my why should my why should I pay for your childcare? But I was like, well, why should I pay for your gym membership? It's the same thing. It's a benefit, right, that you're you may or may not use. So but the sense of like, even after everything we've seen that's happened to women, that's happened to children, that's happened to women of color, we still as a society can't say, you know, you are my neighbor. And I am, you know, we are stronger together. And that is something I think that has really that we need to figure out foundationally, how, how do we get back? Again, in this moment, if you we as a country can't pass paid leave, can't pass forward chocolate can't pass the child, you can't renew the child tax credit. But we're, you know, again, bailing out airlines, what does that say about our system? It says that we're a totally dysfunctional nation that is sliding into Christo fascism. But you know, that's just my take on it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We do live in a neoliberal hellscape. Yeah. But where I take responsibility is I do think that the people that need fighting for like moms are exhausted, we're tired, we don't have a lot of time, and we're burnt. And so part of the mission or opportunity here is to how do you activate them. So I kind of feel like honestly, if I can teach moms how to go into their employer and ask for paid leave, or childcare or flexibility or support for their mental health, and they get one little win. They're gonna like, okay, like maybe I can go call a congressperson. But nobody is feeling like Washington's going to do anything for them because they've been, you know, stomped on for too long. So we have to start building that muscle of activism. Right. We always ask this benevolent dictator question, if you were in charge, and could do anything you wanted, politics aside, what would you do? No political or financial constraints. Absolutely everything reshape our country for us. Oh my god. The first thing I do is I would implement universal childcare. Okay. However we pay for it, we pay for it. I'm all for that. Yeah. I really think it's like, if we care about women's equality at the heart of it is, you know, 80% of women will become mothers at some point in their lifetime. So it's like, this is the thing. And, you know, as I write about my book, it's like we've been focused on, well, you should just lead in and get a mentor, like, you know, do a power pose. Right. And then no. Yeah. No, it's so bogus. And I would love to see what America looks like with some of those, again, structural supports. I love to know what America looks like where it's a culture that doesn't gaslight men for doing care. You know, I, you know, I just, I just think we're never going to get it. We're never getting to equality until we fix, we solve this period. We, you know, why do we have a, I'm sure you, why do we have a nursing shortage? You know, why do we have a shortage in all these industries that are about care men rather collect unemployment than do that, because it's seen as work that men don't do. And I think that again is very deeply American and something that is that we have to also figure out culturally how to change. I joke. I'm like, my goal is to get like Snoop Dogg and LeBron in the next Super Bowl ad to do the laundry. You know what I mean? But like you almost popularize that men doing care work is part of our culture. And one final question. Why do you do this work? You know, I'm a Hindu and in my religion, they say that you're put on earth to do something. And you have to figure out your life is about figuring out what that thing is. And ever since I've been a little girl, I've been a warrior. I have just always thought for the most vulnerable. And so for me, you know, it started with girls and giving them, you know, I've built girls with code, not to teach them just to code, but to give them economic opportunity, to have them march up into the middle class, to leave homeless shelters and get jobs in tech where maybe you can change the, and that happened. And then, you know, I found myself in the pandemic just looking at, you know, what really pissed me off was the school closure decision. It just really pissed me off and it terrified me that they didn't even think about us. And they knew who was doing that work and how like we've almost been on, I have been as a feminist, as an activist, have been fighting for the wrong things, focused on the wrong things. And that if you, I want to change the lives and the trajectory of 40 million mothers. And, you know, to do that, this is my focus and it's the next movement I'm building. And I feel just as passionately as I for the, about this as I did 10 years ago when I built Girls with Code. But well, thank you for joining us. Thank you for having me. A fabulous conversation. And best of luck with your work. You know, that was a really interesting conversation, but it just absolutely brings home how at the root of everything suppressed wages are for virtually all of our social ills. I mean, again, if you, if you just consider that the median full-time worker in America today who earns $50,000, would earn close to $100,000 a year if they had been, if they had merely maintained their same share of GDP since 75. And think about what the impact of that would be on families and the cost of, you know, like people's ability to afford childcare or not needing it. Right. It just staggers the mind. What struck me is what a Hobson's choice we're facing. Right. On this issue, on the one hand, Reshma is absolutely right that, you know, it would be stupid to hold our breath and wait for the federal government to address these issues. It's totally dysfunctional, even if you manage somehow to get a large enough Democratic majority in the next election. And even if somehow you got the majority of these Democrats to act and get useful legislation through the Congress, you know, dollars to donuts, this Republican Supreme Court would just toss it out just because, because that's what they do these days. So the federal government is out of the question. On the other hand, you know, you're absolutely right for being cynical about businesses taking up this mantle and understanding what the rational self-interest is, which is if they want more women in the workforce, if they, if they want to fill this labor gap that they have, well, then, you know, they need to make it possible for women to work. Yeah. And that, and that means having the type of flexible and secure scheduling that Reshma was talking about and having adequate daycare, whether that is on the premises or with a subsidy that's provided to get private daycare, assuming you can find private daycare, which we all know is very expensive and very difficult to do. And I don't know which way you go. Our federal government isn't working. Businesses just ideologically don't want to pay taxes to address this issue and don't want to pay employees to address this issue. And the hardest thing to do and is to change cultural norms. Yeah. And our cultural norms are working against us. Yeah. No, it's true. And are just our cultural expectations. Right. I mean, you know, right on with Reshma with a Marshall plan. Yeah. We need big, bold thinking like that. We need a Marshall plan. And, you know, we talk about this a lot fighting for, for policies, even quixotic policies is necessary to changing the way think people think about the economy and think about these issues and that you don't get it all at once. It, you know, it took decades to get to the point where, you know, people wear seat belts and don't smoking cars around their kids or don't smoke at all. I mean, that was the cultural norm. When I was a kid, everybody did that. My father included, who was a doctor and it took a few decades and we changed those norms, but it takes decades and it takes a concerted effort. And, you know, it's not that I'm feeling hopeless about this. It's just that, oh my God, it's yet another thing that just, it's going to require so much work. Yeah. No, it's true. That said, Nick, other countries not only do it better, they do it right. We have examples out there. And the one that, that I kept thinking back to was our conversation from, I don't know, was it a couple of years ago with Anu Partinan and her husband, Trevor Corso, Anu, the author of the Nordic theory of everything. And she was talking the way they do it in Finland where they're living, where, you know, nobody pays more than a couple hundred dollars a week for childcare. And if you can't afford that, you get high quality childcare for free and all the childcare is high quality. So you don't have to worry about shopping around. You look for the childcare center that is most convenient to you in terms of where you live or where you work. And it frees up everybody to participate in the workforce or not. If they choose to stay home with their kids, which, you know, is a reasonable option, they're free to do that as well. Works pretty good. And it works pretty good in almost every industrial, industrialized country except ours. And I think this brings up another issue, which I think requires a lot of thinking about and more talking about is that, you know, both men and women should be able to stay home with their kids. Maybe not both at the same time, one or the other. If that's what they choose to do. I know it's hard in many careers to take that break. It interrupts with your career path. But if- Well, it's only hard if you're the only one who doesn't. Right. Again, if we change norms and everybody is doing it. Yeah, it's only hard if only one in 100 people do it. That will disadvantage the one in 100. If everybody does it, then it's not hard. But let's be clear. If we were to pay, if you've got a couple of kids and we were to pay one of the parents to stay home and take care of the kids for a couple of years, instead of, until the kids are old enough to go to preschool, instead of putting them in childcare and going to work, it would be cheaper than subsidizing their childcare. And it's not a bizarre idea. We already do this in many states, in Washington state, with home healthcare. We pay people, we essentially employ people to stay home and take care of relatives. And it's not a lot of money. It's not a great living, but it makes a lot of sense. And it works. And a lot of people would rather get paid to stay home and take care of their elderly parents, then go to work and spend that money hiring a complete stranger to do it. Not everybody, some people prefer the other, but it's an option that I think we need to look at more seriously. If you care about childcare, and, you know, there's people on the right who talk about family values, you think women should stay home with their kids. Fine. If the woman wants to stay home with their kids, pay them. Absolutely. Well, a lot of work to do, Goldie. Always, always. Yeah. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at civic action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.