 Hey, my name is Zach Silk. It's been a while since I've been on the podcast. I'm the president of Civic Ventures, and I'm excited to be talking today with one of my old friends and favorite people in politics, Christina Uribe. Hi, Zach. For those of you who not had a pleasure to talk to Christina, she's one of my favorite politicos has been involved in political campaigns up and down the ticket. Everything from local races to legislative races to congressional races and everything in between. And also, like me, has a lot of experience on ballot measures. And so we've spent a lot of time in the trenches, and I thought it'd be really interesting to talk to Christina about some of the ways that politics is playing out here in 2020. I think we first met in 2006. Does that ring a bell to you? I feel like, yes, maybe even a little bit before that congressional campaign when we were doing state legislative races in Washington. Oh my goodness. And back then, if I recall, you worked for Emily's List. Yeah, I had the Western states for Emily's List. Christina, sometimes people say that this is the most consequential election of our lifetimes and normally I laugh about that because I don't remember an election that people didn't say that. But this might actually be the most consequential election of our lifetimes. Yeah, I tend to agree because that is something that we say every election. And to be honest, depending what's on the ballot, if things you care about, especially ballot measured, it is really consequential to your life. For especially for most people who are impacted by jobs or their healthcare or will the government recognize their marriage. It's pretty consequential. But for me on this one, it feels like, yes, this is a pretty big moment, at least in my lifetime. And I think that's true for many folks. In our lifetimes, this is probably the most consequential one. Our plan here is to talk a little bit about Christina's and my view of where things are in the political circumstance we find ourselves in. And then we've asked you all what questions you would want to ask us. And we've gotten just a really rich array of questions and we're going to take as many as we can. And I thought we would start, Christina, by just talking about how do you see the current circumstance? Like, where are we in this election? We're about 100 days out. What do you see when you're looking out there? I think a lot of my brethren who've been doing all the work and everyone who's listening and activists and folks who've basically been engaged in this election since January 21st of 2017. So for some people, this election started three plus years ago. I think for everyone else, it starts now. I can't believe I'm saying this, but I'm actually in favor maybe of shorter election seasons. But I do think the campaign actually starts now. Everything else has been prelude, but now it's the last three months. And before the election, this is really when it's starting. And I think we're starting from a place of where both the candidates and the campaigns and maybe everybody is in this scared of losing position. I think both camps are in that, like scared of losing. Now how people react to that is very different, as we know. And I think that's what we're going to see maybe play out in these last hundred days, is someone who tends to be erratic and unpredictable and dangerous when scared of losing, including in ratings. Again, this is someone who deals in measuring their success by ratings and applause, and that is very dangerous, as we've seen. And then, Zach, you and I both talk about sports a lot. I think, well, we're here to win. So what will that take? Sure, no one wants to lose, but you can't operate from that perspective, right? And so being overly cautious can contribute to losing. And so I think that's where folks will start, where this starts with the Biden folks. Will they be cautious because of being scared to lose, or will they be aggressive and smart over these next hundred days? And then what does everyone else do outside of those campaigns? Because in this day and age, there's a lot around the environment, the context we create for this campaign that's outside of their control as well. Yeah. And then one of the things that I think is important for us to all situate ourselves, there's no question that we now have a plethora of pools, and we have all these different services, whether it's Real Clear Politics or FiveThirtyEight that will aggregate them for you. And you can look at those trend lines, and there's no doubt that Biden is ahead. But the real question is, he's ahead going in, but we're here now in the home stretch. I think the sports analogy would be, it's fine to be up in the third quarter, but the game doesn't end until the end of the fourth quarter. But simultaneous to that, how many times have we watched a sporting event where the team that's ahead in the third quarter gets cautious and takes their foot off the gas and starts playing cautiously, and that allows your opponent back in. And I think that's certainly one of my great concerns. I definitely feel like Democrats as a whole, they often are playing not to lose rather than playing to win. And that's just a very dangerous mentality, particularly for all of his faults, Trump is a wily opponent, and he would be happy to take advantage of that. Right. You can't protect a lead, especially when you know the folks that you're dealing with. I think this is really important. I'm one of those, when you are ahead, specifically around campaigns, that's when you double down. That's when you go harder because of what a Biden win could mean more than the presidency. You and I have been on the opposite side, have been on the losing side on occasion. And I always just think it was a different time, but in 2010, I was working on an independent effort to try and save the house. We were unsuccessful, the House of Representatives. But what I witnessed during that was the waterfront just kept moving away from us, where by the end we were trying to protect relatively safe Democratic seats in Massachusetts. And that's because the Republicans had just shifted and continued to spend and spend in places that seemed unwinnable before. And so I do think when momentum's on your side or if you have a lead, that's actually when you should double down, increase where you're thinking around what's possible. That is not where we should be cautious, but we should be expansive in what is possible. How many state legislatures can we win back in 2020? How many US... It's not just at the federal levels. We've learned anything this year is how much state and local governments matter. And that's where people live and breathe this as well. Let's not be cautious. We need to double down. I am in favor of running up the score. I am not one of those people who thinks when you're ahead by three touchdowns in the fourth quarter that you shouldn't go for another attention. Absolutely. No, this is when you run up the score. This is absolutely what I think we should be doing. We talk a lot about economics on this podcast. And there was an old phrase, it was bandied about in the 1992 race by James Carville, a fellow Politico. And he famously said, it's the economy, stupid. I'm curious, do you think that still holds this notion? I was going to ask you that. I think it depends on what we mean by the economy now. So I do think that's true, but what do we mean by the economy? So for me, it's like, yep, people are out of work and that's going to continue to grow. Sadly, in the next month or two, people are coming up against mortgage payments and rent payments and a real fear around housing loss and protections for people, this giving cash to folks. And they should just continue to give people money so they have some kind of economic security. So I do think it is still the economy, stupid. I just think, and think as a result of the work that folks like you and others have done around like, let's be expansive about what that means, not the stock market. If I've learned anything from you, Zach, the economy is not the stock market. I think people are getting that because that's further and further out of reach for success. There's some people as well. So I think it's how we talk about the economy and what it means to people's everyday lives that if we center that conversation, then it's absolutely about the economy. I'll let you pivot to asking questions. We're going to take questions from people who've asked us questions. So let's get to that. Okay. So there's this one question from Jordan, which is a lot, and I appreciate his thoughtfulness or her thoughtfulness. Why doesn't Joe Biden just tout a message that talks about how for the last 40 years, the GOP has sold us on trickle down economic Smith, which is based on a disproven philosophy that if you give money to the rich, the ritual put in industry and that's all going to create jobs and trickle down to the rest of us and grow the economy. Except for we know, you all know it best on this podcast, that billionaires don't invest money, that money and jobs and other benefits to taxpayers that it just benefits themselves and doesn't trickle down. And he goes on to really get into modern monetary theory and other things around growing the economy. And he does, but like, so why isn't Joe Biden using that long message as part of his message on? Yeah. And Dems in general, I think is what Jordan's asking too. Well, first of all, it's a great question, Jordan. And it is hard for candidates to change the fundamental kind of philosophy of the party they're running for, the office they're running for and the party they're part of. And so it is hard. I just want to say, I am sympathetic for whether it was Joe Biden or Hillary Clinton or Barack Obama, they're running with received wisdom from the party and from the way that we understand economics in this country, which has been shaped as Jordan notes by 40 years of adhering to a very specific economic worldview. The good news is we do know better. We better understand the way the economy really works. There was a long time when people centered the very wealthy and corporations in the economy. And we are changing that. We are now centering people. And you can see these experiments playing out in cities and states that are centering people in their policy. They're more resilient, they're more prosperous. And in places where you don't center people and you center the rich and powerful, you actually are less resilient and less prosperous. The question is, how do you translate that kind of complex evolution on the economy to something that you can make digestible for regular people in their living rooms, often in a 30-second television ad? And that's hard. I will say that that is hard. And that's one of the kind of the arts of politics is how do you translate complex policy into digestible information? Let me say one quick thing. And I'd be curious about your experience with this, Christina. I think it's gotten better. I will say, much to the credit of people who ran in this primary in particular with Elizabeth Warren at the lead and Bernie Sanders, but you even saw it in other characters running, really changing the way we talked about the economy as Democrats. And I found that Joe Biden is really leaning into that. He is rejecting this idea that it's the rich and powerful who drive the economy. And he's leaning into some policymaking. We still have more to see from him, but it's been more consistent and more consistently focused on people rather than the powerful than I think we've seen in a while. Do you agree with that? I do. And I think it's a result of what happens outside of the election. So even going back to what we talked about, like for some people, it started the day after. And I think one of the things we've learned is we need to create the conditions for change in the intervening elections. So you hear a lot about narrative, which is a word I sometimes struggle with, but it really is like the stories we tell. And part of that is like creating the conditions for when things like universal basic income come into our lexicon, whereas like that is more like people talking about that now, not and actually, as you said, some cities experimenting as well with different policies and concepts. Like that is the work around shifting this 40 year kind of campaign by the GOP around trickle down economics. Like that is the kind of culture and narrative that we're working against. And sometimes it could take a really long time, but then there are these what folks talk about as persuasion windows. Like we are in a window right now because of this fracture of a pandemic, economic depression, and really the historical struggles of this country around racism, like all of those coming together at one time. So that fracture that's happened a little bit actually is a window, a persuasion window, I think. I think this is a moment where for people who have been working on these issues for decades, where decades can happen in weeks, where it is an opportunity for us again to really, as you said, like see candidates take some of these ideas and run with them, which may be what have existed in a different scenario. But I do think that's the opportunity. And I do agree that we are making progress and we should actually sell it like the other thing we're working against. I'll just add really quickly is the cynicism. Like you don't take a beat to celebrate our victories and we need to do that because that's how people believe that participating is worth it. That's actually when people are like, Oh, we can change the future by participating in it. Like when we actually lift up like some of the successes we've had and we don't do that enough and we need to. So I've got a question from Brian. It seems clear to him that this upcoming election could be a bloodbath for Republicans, something more akin to what happened in Watergate, where people were for a long time ashamed to call themselves Republican. And he asked, do you think the political fallout will carry both into this election and then beyond? And maybe I should ask, do you think it'll be a bloodbath? Yeah, I was going to say, oh, Brian, I mean, I am definitely an optimist. And while I would not be doing this work, a bit of a pragmatist as well, those calibrate each other. I think the pendulums swing much faster now for a variety of reasons because of just access to information and Twitter and Facebook and TikTok. Like there's just so much information and surround sound that happens in a way that didn't before. So I'm not convinced that it'll be the type of, you know, post Nixon, post Watergate real alignment, but we have seen those big pendulum swings happen, but then they go right back in the other direction. So that's why I'm cautious on like, does it carry over to 2022? So I do think that's the opportunity where could we take back the US Senate and win the presidency and hold onto the House and see some states win back state legislatures. And yeah, because I've seen it happen in the opposite direction in the very recent memory. So I actually believe all of that is possible because I have seen it happen. And so I do believe it's possible. I'm not sure what it carries over to 2022 because as I've seen you talk a lot about Zach and others, like this economic depression that we're facing down is likely still going to be around for whatever incoming administrations are going to be facing. And when we look at state governments and municipalities, like the people who are charged with coming in and cleaning up the mess usually have the hardest work. And is that rewarded two years later or three years or four years later when people are feeling better? I don't know. Yeah, I agree. And I think one of the things to think about is as Christina was saying, it used to be there were more long swings of the pendulum in which it would rest on one side and take kind of a long while to go swing back the other way. Performal settings are quite swift now and part of that is like it or not, we've kind of sorted ourselves into two pretty equally powerful and innovative organized movements. I mean, obviously there's the political parties, the Democrats and Republicans, but underneath that as you've already talked about, Christina, there's this rich set of movement actors on both sides and they spend a lot of time strategizing, thinking, thinking about the evolution of the movement and then its interface with the party. And we have counterparts in the conservative movement who are doing the same thing. And I know for a fact that there are young next generation Republicans thinking about how to change the party to be competitive after Trump. And they're going to be very swift if Trump is defeated in changing and evolving. It really is kind of an ecosystem where there's going to be a really fast evolution here. And I think it's hard to know where they'll go. And I look at it and I can see a world in which you actually have a highly functioning conservative party that is really honestly reckoning with the problems we face in the 21st century and that we can debate about that. So that's one wing. And then there's the other wing, which is basically a nationalist, racial animus nationalist, kind of backwards looking and reactionary, which I don't know which one will win. I mean, there's sort of, I don't know what to call it. There's sort of the Tucker Carlson well represents the kind of white nationalist wing of the party and he is pretty young and very influential. And then there are other characters in the party who I think would like to take it into the 21st century. And in fact, famously they wrote that briefing after Mitt Romney lost, which was trying to get the party to evolve on a bunch of items to move it forward. And I'm not a fan of Marco Rubio, but he actually has said some fascinating things about worker power and the nature of the economy. And I could imagine a world in which a Republican party was willing to have an honest debate with us about how to make the economy work better. But thank you so much for that. Let's get on to the next question. We have one from Craig. So this actually builds a little bit off what we were talking about, which is with so many cash-strapped cities and towns, how will they be able to afford to do vote by mail or put in place the proper precautions to ensure people are safe going to the polls, especially since we know from the federal government they either refuse to help. And really when we're talking about federal government, it's really the US Senate that is refusing to pass anything meaningful. And Trump for sure, the House has tried, but the US Senate is basically blocking anything on this front. So given the economic realities of trying to implement vote by mail and or make voting safe, how's that going to happen without additional resources? Yeah, I think, well, first and foremost, let's be very clear that this is a problem perpetrated by one particular party, which is really the Senate Republicans. Republicans are at large, but Senate Republicans in particular, there have been money allocated by the democratically controlled House. There's actually been some really good work that's been done in Republican controlled states trying to fix this problem. As much as Trump wants to make vote by mail a partisan issue, in most of the country, it's not a partisan issue. In fact, there's a lot of states where they're very Republican states and they have excellent vote by mail systems and they want to use them. It feels like the way that Trump talks about it, that this is bringing out Democrats, but actually the original vote by mail people, let's be clear, were old people and the military. So these are two very strong Republican voting blocs. Vote by mail used to be the primary way that they got an advantage in turnout. So this shouldn't be partisan. We should be able to figure this out. I will say I am encouraged by individual states and what they're doing, even Republican states. Ohio is doing some interesting things. I know Iowa just talked about they're going to go and mail applications to everyone in the state. Wisconsin is doing a variety of things, even though their state legislature is so tightly controlled by Republicans. It's sad to me that we are not seeing more action by the feds. I do think that if you're looking to take near term action to help guarantee, you should be reaching out to your lawmakers, especially if you have a Republican senator in your state to just communicate with them how crucial this is to protect the vote. It is the one thing that keeps me up at night about this election. There's a variety of things, but that's the one that makes me the most nervous, is the inability for people to fully participate. Yeah, I would just add real quickly on that, which is I was nervous when so many people who are committed to expanding the vote, which we shouldn't franchise as many people as possible, make it as safe as possible for everyone, that vote by mail, though, also is not a panacea for this election, to your point, which is A, I know Washington state has it, but it doesn't happen overnight. Places that have done it didn't institute it in one election, and they didn't do it in less than 100 days. In the fact that for indigenous and native communities, vote by mail presents tons of problems as it relates to having addresses versus PO boxes. Also we know that young people and people of color tend to have their vote by mail ballots, I don't want to say discarded, but there's always signature problems or challenges. That's the other thing, there's larger rejection rates. The other piece of that is we also have to demand, and I know there's efforts going on to get young people to sign up to be poll workers. For people who do have to vote early in person or on election day in person, which is still in a large amount of states, we just have to make that as safe as possible. I think really encourage as much early voting as possible because we do know even in Wisconsin that Milwaukee had in their primary an 8% decline in turnout in more democratic areas. That is I think what keeps me up at night as well is just protecting the vote, counting every vote, but thinking about I think someone said we can lose up to 5% election margin based on rejection rates of certain ballots, and that 5% margin is not something that I think we have. I do agree, it's not a partisan issue, but I do worry about making sure that we don't think that even if we had vote by mail everywhere that that is going to enfranchise everyone. So I've got a really good, two different listeners asked a version of this question. I'm going to kind of riff on both of them and ask you, Christina, I think you have a really good perspective on this. I'll start with Alex and their articulation. Today protests are rightfully happening across the country. My wife and I are sitting at home wondering what we can do to help support meaningful change in how this country functions. They have a long list of things that they would like to see done differently, of course, some of which is related to racism and income inequality and the variety of things we talk about. The issue is that we do not feel equipped to counteract the Republican agenda. We live in a progressive liberal area and obviously we vote in that vein and our feeling is that our vote doesn't count towards change or moving Republicans. If we were going to do that, do we have to vote, do we have to move to a Republican area? I don't want to move to those states. So what a, hey Alex, you are speaking a lot of people, you're speaking what is on a lot of people's minds, but I don't want to move to those states. So what else can I do? Now let me say real quick, JD had a similar point. I really appreciate what you're doing, but I'd like to know what ideas you have for how I can help bring about change besides voting. And I can sign endless number of petitions. Is there something else that I can do as a concerned citizen? It's difficult to not feel helpless and frustrated about the lack of changes in our society. Thanks and please keep bringing your message to the people. Thank you, JD. And thank you, Alex. These are excellent questions. And Christina, I'm going to put it to you. What do you reflect on when you hear that? You know, I was asked this question the night before the inauguration in 2017 by a group, a room full of women, mostly who work in tech and creative industries. And it was on the eve of the first women's march and someone saying, like, is that even going to matter? And I think it gets to these questions as well, which is actually first, I'm not going to tell anyone to move because I think you should live if you have that freedom to live in a community that reflects your values that you want to be a part of. And those of us who I think that's what everyone in this country wants. And so you shouldn't have to move to make an impact. And I think not thinking about the large systemic change on an like a day to day perspective, which is I think showing up at a rally, like for people who are impacted and struggling, it does make a difference to see people like in other parts of the country and other communities using their opportunity and maybe greater protections to like speak up and say something. It actually does make an impact when you're part of a community that might be more marginalized or disenfranchised. I tell people this all the time, like giving money, that is not inconsequential, especially if it's like five dollars or ten dollars. I know folks are like, what more can I do? Like the way we fund lawsuits, the way we bail people out to our unjustly locked up either through protest or a criminal justice system that does not have justice in it, like that is with funds. The organizers that you see going, you know, in the old days going door to door in the pre-COVID, but that are making calls and these young organizers that are doing this work on social media and through Zooms, like that all requires money. And I know, you know, for those of us who have it and who can give that, it does make a difference. Showing up at your city council meeting in a Zoom, I participated in my first school board meeting a few weeks ago via Zoom. It's the highest turnout that our school board meeting had ever had. And it was around, you know, disinvesting from the police that are that were in our school district. And there was like 800 people who participated in our school board to take that action. And that's what I mean around like celebrating those victories. Did that one action by our school board reform the entire criminal justice system and incarceration system in our country? No, but it made a difference for the kids in my school district. I can tell you that. And I think that's what it's important to remember and definitely want to hear your thoughts. But like I said, this is someone on just on bail reform, someone who's like, does it make a difference giving to these bail funds, which just reinforces like the system that doesn't work. And it's like, have you ever met someone who was just bailed out or who was incarcerated or someone who one family that's been freed from a detention center or someone who finally has health care that didn't have it before? Like these little actions actually make a difference in people's lives, which is what we've been talking about. Right. There is like that. And then that's how you create the conditions for the big systemic challenges that we need to take on in our country that will not just happen in DC. The fight for 15 is such a good reflection of that as well. Like those were fights happening in communities and victories happening in cities and towns across our country that enforce this larger conversation that goes back to kind of like trickle down economics doesn't work. Right. Like, so I just think like for everyone listening, like it actually does make a difference. Use this opportunity where we can't gather in person in as many ways as possible to like pay attention to what is happening with your city budget, what is happening with your school budget, what's happening at the state level. And if you have money, like pick an organization and it doesn't have to be national to send resources to or to give your time to. Yeah. As someone who's been impacted daily by, you know, the different challenges in our country, it really does make a difference and does help shift this larger narrative and does make the systemic change possible that we need in our country. First of all, I'm very sympathetic to both Alex and JD. It can feel very much like what good does it do for me to vote for a, you know, you may live in a city that has all Democrats and you may live in a state that's blue and you may feel like there's some, you know, that you need to move to Idaho to help change the political makeup of Idaho. But the reality is, and I think Christina, you said it so well, that there are things you can do right now today from home, socially distant, appropriately taking good care of yourself, contributing matters. It doesn't have to be a lot of money. Christina said that so well. Find organizations you believe in. I promise you that those people who are being funded by that, they are working every single day to make the world a better place and they're fighting for it and they are worthy of your investment and it, you can pick and choose the ones that you believe in. You know, I think that is extraordinarily important. Actions do matter. I don't believe in all of these silly petitions. There are a lot of them. There are there and they're really just there to like generate large email lists, but they don't actually have an impact. But if you pick the right organizations, they're figuring out how to translate mass communications into action and they are employing people to go and communicate in the halls of power, whether it's at city hall or at Congress. And there is positive impacts to your communicating. I know it doesn't always feel like it when you're clicking on that email, but participating, really effective organizations, following them. Honestly, all of the most meaningful change in this country has happened when it started at a local level and it almost always involved some act of civic courage and frequently that involved going into the streets, protesting and marching, going to a community meeting, participating in a Zoom call. Those are things that actually do make a meaningful difference. You know, whether that is the fight for 15 or the fight for marriage equality or fight for civil rights or the fight for suffrage. All of these things started in these small places. Often those were on the surface. They look like homogeneous places that might have been blue. I mean, the fight for 15 started with strikes in New York, Chicago and Seattle. I think those are blue places. And now we have Amazon has $15 as its fundamental minimum wage, right? When the Democrat running for president is running on a $15 minimum wage, those are things that can happen. And that's because of actions from people like you. Yeah. So, Cristina, I just wanted to ask one last question of you. So we talked about the hundred days. This is about when the election actually starts for most people. What are you going to be looking for in the next hundred days? What are you going to be watching for? I'm thinking about what comes between election day 2020 and Inauguration Day 2021. I'm thinking about, Zach, you're in Washington state. So like my mantra is count every vote. We won't know on election night. A functioning democracy wants to take the time to make sure we got it right. We count every vote. I'm actually, I'm so focused on that. So what I'm looking for the next hundred days is like making sure we get that story to take hold, to be honest, like the candidates are going to do what they want to do, what need to do and run their campaigns. And I'll be watching that, but I'm really more looking at like, how do we ensure that everyone is prepared to know that we need to count every vote and ensure every vote is counted? It won't happen on election night. Reporters in Washington state know that in Colorado, in California, in Oregon, increasingly in other states. And the public needs to be reassured of that. Like the fact that we don't know doesn't mean something is wrong. So that's what I'll be watching for is how we start to shift that in. And I'm also worried about like a bad narrative taking hold on what happens between election day and inauguration day. That's what I'll be looking for. People's excitement around the election as well, because I do think this is when people start to get engaged and I'll be interested in that. So those three things. I agree with that 100%. Those are really important and probably among the most consequential things. So it's not just simply who's going to win the election, but there's going to be a spin war like we have not seen in, I guess maybe since Bush v. Gore in 2000. It's going to be similar to that. I think we all need to be prepared. And then as someone was noting earlier, I'm really curious to see how the Biden team and all the Democrats start thinking about running on and talking about the economy in the next 100 days, because as voters tune in, this is when their messaging is going to be most impactful. It's just something that they really center people and talk about a new way to think about the economy. So I'll be watching for that too. Hey, Christina, what a pleasure. It was awesome talking. This is so great. We did this on the day that both of our teams are playing, are having opening night too and baseball is crazy as that is. So I take that as a good omen. Me too. It's all starting now. It all starts today. It all starts today. Yep. That's the first pitch. Let's go. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.