 Hey Pitchfork listeners, we're working on another Ask Me Anything episode and we need your questions for Nick and the team. What do you want to know? Call us at 731-388-9334. Leave us a voicemail asking your question and we might just answer it on our next AMA episode of Pitchfork Economics. Again, that's 731-388-9334. Looking forward to hearing your questions. You know, we've privatized a crap load of stuff and I think it's safe to say that the quality of life in the country certainly has not improved. Privatization is one of the key strategic approaches to dismantle government, you know, to make government cash cow for the private sector and corporate interests. If there's one thing I've learned from the COVID-19 pandemic is that we live in the best of all possible worlds, right? That's right. The market has totally fixed it. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. In today's episode, we get to talk about privatization of public goods with our old friend Donald Cohen. And, you know, it's a really interesting subject area and has been, you know, one of the main thrusts of the neoliberal takeover of government and policy. This idea that the market is always right, that market solutions are always superior to public solutions. They're always more efficient. The quality of the service is always better, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And the pursuit of private profit always serves the public good, the public interest, the invisible hand. Exactly. Exactly. If there's one thing I've learned from the COVID-19 pandemic is that we live in the best of all possible worlds, right? That's right. The market has totally fixed it. Exactly. And, you know, we've privatized a crap load of stuff. And I think it's safe to say that the quality of life in the country certainly has not improved. And, you know, I think the other thing that's really interesting about this subject area is that the effects of privatization extend far beyond, you know, merely the quality or the price of the goods and services that you're trying to provide. It has, I think, in my opinion, had a really big effect on how we feel collectively about government and how we operate as citizens or don't, as the case may be. And one of the reasons why I brought up the COVID pandemic at the start is because I think there's been there's a stark example of this conflict between our perception of the market and the market efficiency and how it really works in the real world when you get to things like health care, how unprepared we were, how decades of privatization, the fact that we are the only major industrialized nation without a public health, without a national public health system, and how decades of privatization left our health care system, leaving it with so little resiliency when this pandemic hit that, yes, it was efficient to shut down all those rural hospitals. It was definitely efficient because you had less overhead, you had less excess capacity because let's be honest, you know, a hospital, many of those beds are going to be unfilled most days, and there's a cost that comes with that until you have like this amacron surge, where even in Seattle, which is packed with hospitals, they're lining people up on cots in the hallway, because there isn't enough space to deal with, you know, what we all knew was inevitable. Right. And here we are. Anyway, I you know, I think nobody thought about this subject more than our guest, Donald, who we know well, and who's been thinking about these things carefully. So it'll be really fun to hear him elaborate on the challenges of private organization and what we should all do about it. My name is Donald Cohen. I'm the executive director of In the Public Interest. We're a national strategy and research and policy center around public goods and services. I just published a book entitled The Privatization of Everything, How the Plunder of Public Goods Transformed America and How We Can Fight Back. Give us a little context about your organization and about your book and what brought you to the subject. The organization that I created and lead is, you know, we were kind of a think and act tank that supports policymakers, unions, community groups around the country that are trying to, you know, fight bad privatization deals of their public goods and services and increase public revenues to sort of make government better, function better. We do that in a lot of sectors, infrastructure, education, social services, kind of the, you know, as the title of the book says, The Privatization of Everything. We deal with pretty much everything that's, you know, that's a public thing and a public service. The reason that I got into the work and the reason that I, you know, we wrote the book is that, you know, I've long believed, as an older person, I've long believed in the value and the importance of both public ideals and public services and have seen, you know, over the last several decades kind of assault on both the idea and the institution of government. Privatization is one of the key strategic approaches to dismantle government and to turn, you know, to make government, you know, cash cow for the private sector and corporate interests. So, you know, we publish a lot of research, do a lot of trainings and support, work with policymakers on crafting policy and analyzing policy, and we do it primarily around the country, at cities and states. So let's get some definitional issues out of the way. When you say privatization, you're using that term a bit more broadly than the way an economist might, aren't you? Yes. You know, I mean, most people think of privatization, they'll remember, you know, George W. Bush's efforts to privatize social security, they'll think of a private prison, or maybe school vouchers, depending on where they are. And all those things are true. But my definition is as follows. It's private control over public goods. We distinguish, and we can get into, we distinguish a little bit how we define public goods, even from the economics textbooks. But it's essentially, you know, the things that we all need, and we need everyone to have. That's the most colloquial definition of use of public goods, you know, education, knowledge, health, clean air and water, community, parks, libraries, at all levels of our economy and our society. The distinction on public goods, because I'll make is, if you look in the economics textbooks, public goods is a very narrow definition. And we reject that definition. The definition being it's non-exclusive and non-rivalrous. These are things that fundamentally, if you can exclude someone from having it, and that's the non-exclusive, and the non-rivalrous is you can, somebody using it doesn't prevent somebody else from using it. You know, that's their definition of a public good, simply just that. And in our view, in my view, is that leads, let's the market decide what we get and what we don't get. Now, take healthcare. In that definition, healthcare is a private good, not a public good. You know, can we exclude people? Yeah, sure do. Lots of people. And in fact, there are only so many hospitals and doctors and nurses, you know, we're learning now. So it's right, you know, there's limited supply. But when we say public, the word, the definition we use for public goods is we should be able to decide through democratic processes that everybody, that healthcare and other things are things that we should all have, regardless of whether you have the money to pay for it, regardless of how much money you have. You know, that's what democracy is about is, you know, is living your aspirational values. But so Don, this is obvious, but I do think it's worth teasing out what has been the main thrust of the privatization argument over the last 45 or 50 years? Of the advocates for privatization. Yeah, like, so it's, it's, I'd say it's a couple things. I mean, the fundamentals are, you know, I think there's some level of, you know, you know, six propaganda successes and some level of good opportunism and political strategy. Government fails us, right? It's wasteful, it's inefficient. It's bureaucratic. Number one, number two is, and the private sector is inherently more efficient. Market mechanism, competition and the profit motive are inherently better mechanisms to deliver the most for the most or deliver goods and services to all. So, you know, those are the, you know, those are the elements we deal with at a day to day basis. You know, oh, you know, private sector is always more efficient than government. It turns out not to be true, but there's also more to interrogate there. So why did governments privatize? There's a set of reasons. Depends on who. First off, you know, governing is hard. If you're a mayor, I like to think at that level, and you've got a lot of problems and a major global corporation comes to you with pretty pictures and they say cheaper and better and faster, one less and no new taxes. Again, not true. You know, yeah, take this off my hands, right? So, and it happens all the time. It happens because of desperation, right? And just the challenges of running a city, say, but it also happens because of the sea we're living in that we've been, we've been talking about the sort of the basic belief. Yeah, market good, government bad market inefficient, government inefficient. So you know, we're, we're swimming in that sea. The other piece of this, of course, is ideological and political. There are massive, you know, amount of money spent by ideologues and conservative think tanks and corporate front groups and others to sell the ideas of privatization and forward, you know, so all of these are sort of at play and in an environment of austerity where you don't have a lot of resources, but when a government's desperate because they don't have the resources to give things. And by the way, they believe everybody believes the market's better anyway. And they have relationships with those companies as well. I think that's less important than people think it is, but it's real people outsource unions. I mean, in red States, they're in other, they do it as a matter of, you know, they get elected to do that because they could break, you know, they could bust unions, they could, you know, downsize government. They don't downsize government. They just make it a Leviathan. They just make it something else. And they can put it, you know, they can put it where they can get their hands on it. I think what's really important is to tease out the fundamental thrust of the privatization argument because it's plausible. It's just not true generally. And, you know, the plausible part of the argument is that markets are more efficient and just are better at providing goods and services than government is. And there is some truth to the way in which markets effectively solve different kinds of problems, right? The market is better at evolving better cell phone designs than a giant government bureaucracy is likely to. That's correct. And which is why, you know, it's great to have a robust technology sector competing to try to find better and better solutions to these kinds of problems. That is true. And there are some circumstances within which the private markets do really deliver as, you know, not to pun, but deliver the goods. But the truth is that they're actually not more efficient or effective at a variety of tasks, including things like healthcare, you know, and this is probably the canonical example in the United States where we spend in the range of twice as much per citizen per year for healthcare outcomes that are worse than our rival developed nations do using non-market mechanisms, you know, for better outcomes. And, you know, to make it really, really super simple. I mean, I'm not sure about these numbers, but generally, private insurers in the United States take a 15% cut on every healthcare dollar, but in a reasonably well-run public system like Canada or Taiwan or whatever it is, that cut is 2% or something like that. Yeah, 3%, 3%. I mean, well, yeah, these are a little bit old numbers, but Medicare, you know, typically was administering at about 3% overhead, you know, and remember the 15% overhead in the private sector includes other things, includes profits, it includes debt service for, you know, mergers or acquisitions. The thing what you said about markets is both really true. It's not that it's true is that there are truths, right? Because the profit motive drives innovation. Now, that's not universally true. No, you can have innovation lots of places. Or no innovation. Exactly. In the case of monopolies. Well, and also the profit motive, you know, created the opioid crisis. Am I right? Correct. Right. So, you know, so it's sort of in each of these things, you know, the laws of supply and demand are real, but they sometimes they have counter public purpose effects. That's right. Right. And so I think that there's, you know, one of the things I say a lot is there's different things, market things and public things are different. Yeah. Right. If you want to give it's not question, even in our, you know, a single payer healthcare system, there's private facilities, right? Yeah. So the question is, is it in a public thing, you want to make sure that the public means all everybody gets and market things don't do that. Right. And so that's it. So I just think it's when I say over and over again, it's like, it's like, you know, using a hammer to cook your eggs, they're just different things. Right. So I did want to drill down a little bit because you did title the book, the privatization of everything. So that would suggest there's a lot of things that have been privatized. Can you give us some examples and some of the most egregious cases of privatization? We don't know what the scope is numerically. There's no data, you know, at the state and local level in particular. So what we do know is that, you know, there are in the federal level because Paul Light's done research is that there are three times as many people who work, who do public things and work, you know, provide services that the government pay for that don't work for government. Three to one. So there's a massive amount. The other thing we know is virtually every sector. And we look, you know, everything we do, you know, roads and bridges and water and schools and parks and libraries. And you could literally go down the list and not find anything where there's not a private corporation thinking about how to get a piece of it. And, you know, and we look at, you know, investor calls and we look at the, you know, the marketing, you know, the strategic plans, you know, discussions of private industries and corporations. And, you know, there's trillions of dollars spent every year by governments. And if you're the head of a private prison company, there's a hundred to $200 billion you could get your hands on. So we know it's with seven to eight to $9 trillion being spent every year, everything's at stake. I'll give a few examples that illustrate the larger problematic dynamics. So Chicago in 2008 or early nine bleeding cities, bleeding red ink privatized its parking meters for 75 years. There was a proposal made by a consortium of Morgan Stanley, a sovereign welfare firm from the Middle East and a national parking company and said, we'll give the city $1.1 billion upfront in exchange for control of the parking meters for 75 years. That's till 2083. Two things, and then vote, they voted on Tuesday, you know, desperate politicians, desperate government is a good place to market your wares. Right. Two things became true after that fact, when it was analyzed by the inspector general and others, two things. One, more importantly, even if it's incredibly stupid way to borrow on your future revenues, just, you know, who knows if we're going to be driving in 19 in 2083. But even if they did, they got hosed, they sold a billion dollars too cheap. So that's one. But here's more important. Now for the for the life of the contract, the remaining 60 some odd years of the contract that if the city wants to eliminate parking spots permanently for bus rapid transit, for bike lanes, for pedestrian malls, because land use patterns change because housing patterns change, they have to buy the spots back. Okay, so what does that mean? You have to keep the interests of the and contracts, as you well know, are very rigid documents. So you have to keep the interests of the private, you know, party whole. And that fundamentally ties the hands of democratically elected alderman and the mayor of Chicago from dealing with fundamental things, land use, housing, transportation, climate, you know, all of their basic responsibilities. So we see that over and over again. Another example I'll give a go to charter schools, because that's an interesting one. And there's good charters and bad charters. That's not the issue. The you know, and the original idea was laboratories of innovation, and then share the ideas so that all students, you know, all schools could benefit. There are charter schools around the country that make their teachers sign, sign NDAs, non disclosure agreements to prevent them from sharing the school's quote trade secrets. What are those trade secrets? Lesson plans, teaching methodology, right, the exact thing that you know, where we should be sharing if we if the right if the purpose of our public dollars, because they're all publicly funded, is to, you know, it's improved education, improve education. And then let me give an example about the idea about the market, what's in the market. It's a crazy one, I'm not going to read something. So, you know, all the data for our weather apps is public data from the National Weather Service, all of them. But there are companies AccuWeather, whether you know, all of the ones that we look at on our phones and Google and on the TV, you know, package, package that data in different ways. Some it's nonsense, it's just better graphics and some you know, specialized stuff for businesses. So AccuWeather is one of the biggest companies, Trump did try to appoint the head of it to run the weather service but fortunately failed. So they had a contract with Union Pacific, you know, train company. So here there was a tornado in Oklahoma. And here's I'm going to read you what the CEO said after the fact about his service. Two trains stopped two miles apart, they watched the tornado go between them. Unfortunately, it went into a town that didn't have our service and a couple of dozen people were killed. But the railroad did not lose anything. Oh, well, there's the market. There's the market. Okay, the market excludes the markets for some the market is for those that have resources. And public goods as we're defining and public things need to be for all. Now, one last one last just to give a taste, you know, Medicaid was privatized in a couple of states, Iowa, Kansas. And it's you know, it's pretty simple. So I won't dwell on it. You know, big, you know, public corporations took over big pieces of it. What happened? You know, services went down. Because here's why because when you when they talk about efficiency, they really mean they'll do it for less, right? They'll do as good or better for less. Yeah. And when you take profit out, you take exact comp out, you take, you know, mergers and acquisitions, debt service for mergers and acquisition, that money's got to come from somewhere. Yeah, there's a very finite list of places that comes from workers, workers, wages, the number of workers, the level of service, the quality of the equipment. And as we learned during the pandemic, an efficient healthcare system is far less resilient. Because one of the things that makes it efficient is to have less capacity, less redundancy. Exactly right. Yeah. But the other thrust of the argument, I think that's very, very important is that destroying our capacity to provide public goods also is highly detrimental to our conceptions of social cohesion and democracy and the rest of it, right? Like this is, this is, you know, like this is the, I think, obviously, the more serious threat today, is the fact that so many Americans don't really believe in the country anymore. Right? They don't believe they live in a country and that they have, that they benefit from it, or that they should contribute to it. You know, that's a very, very serious problem. I couldn't agree more. I think it is at the core of much of a lot of a lot because one thing if we're not in it, if we're not solving the same problems, we're not going to get to the big ones, right? We're certainly not going to get to the big ones. To the extent that we are, you know, markets segregate and stratify and segment, right? And so to the extent that we move in that direction, either by commodifying existing public goods and services or by just, or by, you know, voucher schools and a whole other set of things, we're not experiencing the same thing. We're not in the same community. And so, and if we don't understand each other, if we don't, if we can't appreciate the other, the experience of the other, we can't, you know, the problems we solve are just for us. You know, one of the ideas we talk about in the book is, you know, one of the shifts has been philosophically, Michael Sandel's written about it and others, you know, there's a shift from our identity, from citizens to consumers. Right? Where, in a consumer, you know, we all consume, you buy something and all you really care about is whether you get what you want, whether it's good enough. But as citizens have a different both set of values and a purpose, you know, you want to get good stuff, you want the quality of the service to be quality, but you also understand our interdependence. And you also understand that it's in our social interest, democratic interest, economic interest for every kid to be educated, not just mine, for everyone to have good health care and not just me. I think it's crucial. And, you know, I mean, we talk in the book, there's a section of the book, you know, books broken into sections called community, which I have my favorite. You know, we talk about parks, we talk about libraries, we talk about increasing segregation in education through both charters and vouchers. We're seeing that. And that we're, you know, the less we share public things together, you know, how that weakens democracy, as you say. And then the last section is about social security, because that's the community of the whole. And notice how resilient it is, politically. Okay, so we've talked about all the privatization that has happened, and both the specific and broader political, sociological impacts. What's the alternative? What's the opposite of privatization? What should, is there a set of rules for what government should be handling? Yes, what's the alternative? Let me start there. So the alternative of private control of Republic goods is public control of Republic goods. Now that and I'm using the word control very specifically, it's not public delivery, we're not talking about, you know, social, you know, nationalization of all goods and services that we're not talking about this public and private and everything. But the question when you get on the public goods is who's in charge? And how do you get in charge? You know, you might deliver it yourself, you know, public, like public schools, you might deliver it directly. But you also set standards. I mean, so standard for private and public, you know, you set standards both in process, you know, in performance and outcomes, but also in process, and also in procedures, how things are done. You set standards that think forward, you know, like in Chicago, they just didn't think forward, right? What's gonna happen later? So you have to set standards. But secondarily, you need cops on the beat, right? It's one thing to have standards. It's one thing, you know, we have lots of food safety standards that are quite good. But we've increasingly, you know, both cut the funding for FSI, you know, the food inspection service and now allow companies to self inspect, right? If you don't have Boeing 737 being a marvelous example of what happens when companies self inspect. Well, not and not just self inspect. And they think that that's about a they use a contracting model. Right. So I mean, here's the one thing that's really true. Everybody gets the following thing that if we all contract for things, paint a house or whatever, right? And we all know something, if you don't watch bad things happen, right? So we never increase when we when when governments outsource something, say, we never increase the bureaucratic staff to oversee the contracts. What do you think is gonna happen? Yeah, you're gonna get screwed. Yeah, whether it's either corruption or incompetence, or what have you exactly, right? There's a you know, as a part of the answer to your question, Goldie is not a well, take your question to another place is we have lots of power to set those standards and make sure they're lived up to that we don't use. Right? The government has police power, you know, regulatory power. So we can use that and we should use it. We have procurement power, you know, governments in America, you know, data we've seen spend $2 trillion a year. Right? That's statistically and you know, significant in terms of what could have an impact on inequality. If we you know, if we establish, you know, job standards, which we should, we create social insurance, we could take things into the social wage, like childcare and other things that are now market goods. So what I believed if there was, you know, one, you know, if I was God or the president or some combination there, you're getting to our benevolent dictator question. I would say what I would say is every public decision, whether it's a land use decision at a city, or whether it's, you know, or whether it's by an airplanes or whether it's, you know, run in prisons or whatever, but every public decision should be oriented towards solving the big ones. And what are the big ones? You know, I think you'll agree, inequality, climate, racism, and democracy. So everything should be oriented towards that you don't I mean, you can, we can come up with a list of specifics, make sure it's transparent and their standards and good living wages, and all that. But I think the guidance needs to start with, use every decision to solve our problems today and, and make sure we're doing no harm at the minimum, but at the maximum, and more appropriately, we should be actually making progress on those things. So so we have the right to be aspirational, and instead of just leaving it up to the market. Yeah, we should do. I mean, and this is part of the propaganda success of the 30 last 40 years is the mark is market fundamentalism and the, and the inherent superiority of the market. Like I said earlier, there's market things and there's public things. There are different things and the market is nowhere near it's not even not superior, it's not appropriate for public things. So in terms of practical solutions, what should we be doing in the world today? Well, I say two things, one of which I sort of mentioned. So one is to be aware of the public things around us and the public decisions around us, it sounds silly to say, but it's important because we also, one thing I say about public services is that they're both invisible and ubiquitous. Yeah. And we take them for granted. We completely take, you know, you turn on the tap and it's a miracle, the water comes out, we don't think about where it goes, where it comes from. It's an even bigger miracle is when we go to the bathroom, when we flush, it just goes away. Exactly. We're going to stay in our house. And it probably goes a fairly large, long distance to get somewhere. Exactly. So one is to be aware. The other is to interrogate the decisions that are being made in your community about those things, understand what's public, what's private and all that. And then also when you hear, you know, when there's an effort that we're going to privatize a big thing, interrogate those core, you know, ideas and arguments that they use, like you were talking about earlier, what do they mean by efficiency? They say they're going to do it cheaper. What do they mean? What power or authority might we lose? Right. What's their interest? You know, water companies, if you look at their 10 Ks and their risk factor sections, you know, water conservation is a risk factor, is a risk to them. So it's really important to understand that. And then finally, I think setting standards, absolutely crucial. One of the things we do in our organization is because we deal with so many things and, you know, and some some of them are fairly complicated, the financing of infrastructure. Most important thing is to ask hard questions. Like I was saying, what's going to happen to the jobs if you're going to outsource something and the way you're going to save money is going to turn a $25 an hour job of a bus driver into a $15 an hour job. You know, you shouldn't do that. And in fact, what you are doing is hurting the economy, increasing inequality. So we do this all the time with electeds and policymakers, teaching them how to ask those hard questions. Another question. Why do you do this work? That's a good question. You know, I decided, you know, what's my politics or what are my beliefs? Real simple. I hate greed and I hate hate. Those are my motivating values. And then the other thing is, I think people, you know, the only way change happens is people making it and people who are people who need to have an understanding of the challenges we face, why they are that way and what you can do about them and and, you know, and how to make change happen. And which is how I spend most of my days actually helping people learn those things and help them do those things. Fabulous. Well, Don, thank you so much for being with us. Thanks. Best of luck on the new book. All right. We'll talk soon. Okay. Bye. Take care. So I think, Nick, one takeaway I had from this conversation is one that we've discussed previously on the podcast, and that is this idea about how I guess it's the word to use is choice, that that when it comes to what we consider to be a public good, the economics textbooks would narrowly tell you that this or this is not a public good. And it's this very narrow example of when government should should step in. And I think what what Donald explains very clearly is we have a choice. We can choose what we consider to be a public good. When people say that health care is a right, and people dispute that no, it's a right. If we say it's a right, we can make health care right when people argue for housing to be a right. Yes, it can be a right. It can be a right if we say it's a right because these aren't natural rights, those things don't exist. rights are things that are granted to you within a functional society. That's right. And whenever I think about these problems, I always want to zoom out to other examples and you know, just where you'd want to live. And you know, in places that take the right of health care seriously, you know, you have pretty high functioning societies where people feel pretty good about their health care system and where you in places that take housing seriously as a right, it turns out everybody can afford to live in a house and you don't have 10s of 1000s of homeless people crowded under bridges and begging on streets. And, you know, it just seems so obvious to me that, you know, in the United States, we've been hoisted on our own petard, right? We bought this free market nonsense for generation, and are now living with the consequences of the downsides of it all, including, you know, ridiculous housing costs for most families, catastrophic levels of homelessness in most cities, a health care system that bankrupts, routinely bankrupts middle class families when they have a tiny problem. You know, like all of this stuff, all of these challenges are a consequence of this dumb neoliberal view that the market will sort all our problems out if you just let people make profits doing it. And it just does not turned out to be true that there's a ton of stuff that doesn't work that way. And this is the brilliance, of course, of the Grover Norquist drowned government in a bathtub campaign, that the more you succeed at doing that, the worse it makes government look to everybody. And it makes it easier to drown the government in a bathtub. You know, it's this vicious circle where eventually, yeah, it is going to circle the drain. Yeah. Yeah, the worse you make it the less. Yeah, the less fulfilling. Yeah, obviously, it's like the Republicans run on the message that government is bad at doing things put us in charge of this thing that that we don't believe in. And then they go about making government less effective. Yeah. Which brings up another thing, I think it's just important takeaway and something we've talked about a lot on the podcast. And that is, you know, that word effective, this difference between efficiency and effectiveness, you can make something cheaper, that doesn't make it better. Yeah, you can make something efficient, more efficient, that doesn't make it more effective. And if we define efficiency, totally in terms of, of costs, the market may be better than that. Private companies may often be better than that, because cost is their bottom line. And they don't care how much they screw the community or screw their workers or screw their customers, if they can increase profits, right? Whereas in a democracy, the government has to answer the voters, right? And so you end up with like public construction projects being more expensive than private construction projects, because public projects have to pay the prevailing wage, whereas private developers can go and hire non-union labor forces at below prevailing wage. Yeah. And those are choices we make as a society. Yeah. And, and there's, there's benefits often to spending more money. Yeah, like a high functioning society. And so for sure, everybody buy our friend Don Cohen's new book. I think it makes a really, really fun argument. And the title again is the privatization of everything, how the plunder of public goods transformed America and how we can fight back. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at civic action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on medium at civic skunk works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at pitchfork economics. As always from our team at civic ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.