 Over the last 40 years, we've seen a new oligarchy arise in the United States on the foundation of Reaganism. We don't talk a whole lot about oligarchy in our day to day, in the writing that we do and even in this podcast, but it is very much the same mechanism. Wealthy people have always done everything they can to hold on to power and to enhance their power. And you really do want to solve this problem, you are actually going to have to eat the rich. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm Paul Constant and I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. Today we're going to talk about oligarchies. So an oligarch is a very rich business leader with a great deal of political influence. And joining me today is the host of this podcast, Nick Hanauer, who is a very rich business leader with a great deal of political influence. How you doing, Nick? I'm good. Thank you for pointing that out, Paul. It's very kind of you. Sure, sure. Well, as our resident oligarch, no, I think I'm really excited today to get to talk to our guest, Tom Hartman. He's the number one progressive radio talk show host in the US and is a best selling author and he is a new cool book out called The Hidden History of American Oligarchy, Reclaiming Our Democracy from the Ruling Class. Tom comes at it, I think, in his book a slightly different way than we do on our podcast generally, where we talk in more, I think, more precise terms about economics. But I think we're in agreement with his generalized thesis, which is that absolute power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely. When you concentrate power in the hands of the few, however you do it, in a commercial society you tend to do it with economic power, that's bad for everyone else. And I think that the inequality that the oligarchy that we live in represents or implies is definitely tearing the society apart in ways which are becoming more and more obvious to even the casual bystander. Even some Republicans in our country today may be starting to think jeepers, creepers, we got to manage this thing a little bit better. Yeah, and it's interesting because we don't talk a whole lot about oligarchy in our day to day in the writing that we do and even in this podcast, but it is very much the same mechanism, trickle down economics, the $50 trillion that has been taken out of Americans' paychecks and into the wealthy. This is all still oligarchy. It's just Hartman in his book is talking about it very clearly as what he believes is one of the leading problems of our time. There's simply no doubt that the enrichment of the few and the impoverishment of the many is driving to a great extent the shitstorm which is happening politically in our country. One of the themes that we're going to need to explore and develop more in the podcast is the interrelationship between economic inequality and racism and white privilege and the ways in which the changing demographics and inequality is fueling this rage on the right and let's face it, anger on the left. But there could be no doubt that oligarchs played a huge role in electing Donald Trump. I know a ton of really rich people who don't give a rip about anything but themselves and thought, well, more low taxes, yay, without ever considering that there may be a downside to that. One of the things I loved about this book is it puts the oligarchy in a historical context. Yes. There's a lot of great stuff in here about slavery and indentured servitude all the way up to the prison state today and debt peonage which is still going on in Mississippi and Alabama. That's one of the things I really enjoyed about this book was it put it all in historical context. For me, I don't enjoy. For me, I appreciate knowing that this has happened before because if it's happened before and it's been overcome, then it can be overcome again. Yeah. The depressing part is that usually when it's overcome, there was a civil war or a world war, some conflagration that definitely was not pleasant to get through for most people. The book covers a lot of history. We thought we would share an excerpt from the audio version of the book that will get you up to speed on the role oligarchs have played in American policy and politics over the centuries. The transition from democracy to oligarchy usually starts with a very wealthy acquiring political power by buying influence with elected officials. They typically justify this with a belief that oligarchy is more stable and less messy than democracy and that their success demonstrates that a sort of Darwinian process has chosen them to lead. From there, they begin to so completely control the mechanisms of information, the media, and campaigns, financing campaigns directly as well as indirectly by a third party groups, that their agenda overwhelms the governing agenda. In the final stages, oligarchs themselves or people so tightly aligned with them that they could only be called agents of particular oligarchs rise up through seemingly democratic processes and take complete or near complete control of government. From there, oligarchs typically begin to, as Steve Bannon said, was the main goal of the Trump administration, deconstruct the administrative state, seizing control over and corrupting every subordinate agency of government from those responsible for enforcing the laws and the courts to regulatory agencies to those controlling the nation's currency and economy. I'm Tom Harbin, the author of the Hidden History of American Oligarchy, reclaiming our democracy from the ruling class. Tom, thank you so much for being with us. Let's start by setting a stage. You break the history of American oligarchy into three phases. What are they? Well, there was the oligarchy of the British and the monopoly over American commerce, largely from the East India Company. We rose up and overthrew that oligarchy. In fact, the wealthiest families in North America at the time, in the 1770s, were all aligned with the British. The Johnson family, for example, up in Northern New York State, had a literal castle with over 1,000 people that worked for them, including a number of enslaved people, the people of all races who were there. It was bizarre. They left when the American Revolution happened, as did many of these very, very wealthy families. So that was the first phase. The second was, with the invention of the cotton gin and the widespread distribution of it around the 1820s, those southern plantations that were large enough at scale to be able to afford the machine, which could do the... One machine could do the work of 50 enslaved people in terms of stripping the cotton seeds out of the cotton. Those large plantations that could afford a machine were able to very, very rapidly overwhelm, economically overwhelm their competitors, ran out of business most of the small cotton farms in the south. You ended up with a new oligarchy rising during the period of basically 1820 to 1840 in the south about a generation, a generation, maybe two generations by 1860. That oligarchy rigidified on the foundation of the police state that had already been established, which I read about in the first book in this series, The Hidden History of the Friends of the Second Amendment, that was put into place to preserve slavery. Those oligarchs rose up and challenged the United States itself. We defeated them in the Civil War and broke up that oligarchy. Then we saw the rise of an oligarchy. There have been several of them, actually. We saw a rise of an oligarchy in the roaring 20s, came out of the Industrial Revolution. The Great Depression and the New Deal kind of took an axe to that one. Now, over the last 40 years, we've seen a new oligarchy arise in the United States on the foundation of Reaganism. Wealthy people have always done everything they can to hold on to power and to enhance their power, but how have the ways in which they do that changed over time? Well, first of all, to define oligarchy, a democracy is ruled by the people. Oligarchy is ruled by the rich. Typically, the way that the rich have extended and maintained oligarchy is through capture of government. Before a nation becomes a full-blown oligarchy, you have wannabe oligarchs emerging. If the nation allows political bribery, then it's pretty much a guaranteed thing within a generation or two. You will have substantial capture of government by the forces of great wealth in the nation. That happened here in the United States in 1976 in the Buckley versus Vallejo decision when the Supreme Court legalized billionaires owning individual politicians. Two years later in the First National Bank versus Bellotti decision, the Supreme Court decision that was written by Lewis Powell, the guy who was the brainchild of the whole American era. That Bellotti decision legalized corporations owning individual politicians. Then we had a decision just a few years ago that the prior limit had been just basically a few hundred politicians that an individual billionaire corporation could so completely subsidize that you could say that they owned them. They turned that number to unlimited. The Supreme Court really set up oligarchy in the United States. When they did that in 1976 and 1978, the Democratic Party was still awash in money from unions. They didn't much pay attention to it, but the Republican Party jumped on and brought all this oligarchic money into the party, thus propelling Reagan into the White House in 1980. Then they got real serious. They dropped the top tax rate from 74% down to 25%. Just five years earlier, corporations had provided for a third of all the federal revenues. Right now it's 6%. By the end of the Reagan Revolution, I think it was down around 12% to 14%. It didn't have the exact numbers in front of me. It's a process that's fairly predictable. We've seen it happening country after country over the last couple of centuries. It's reversible, but it can be very difficult to reverse. It typically takes a crisis in order to reverse it. The Great Depression stopped, the roaring 20 stopped, stopped the oligarchy that was rising. The Civil War stopped the oligarchy in the South. The Revolutionary War stopped the British oligarchy. There are those who are suggesting that the pandemic might be the crisis that would provide for the end of this oligarchy. Others are suggesting that Trump's overreach, his attempt to impose fascism in the United States is the crisis that's going to allow us to challenge oligarchy. There are others who are suggesting that the stock market is so wildly inflated as a result of the Fed doing something it's literally never done in its history, which is over the last four years, excuse me, over the last year, they have literally invented out of thin air $7 trillion, half of the entire GDP of the United States, or a little less than half, and used that money to buy corporate stocks and bonds. Never before has the Fed done this. In fact, there are those who argue that it's illegal. In doing so, what they've done is they've propped up giant corporations. They're buying their debt, buying the bond, and the stock market by buying stocks. Thus, it kept the market high. If the Fed pulls back from that, you're going to see a massive crash in the stock market. Even if the Fed doesn't pull back, stocks right now are so overvalued that just nature may take its course and crash the stock market. If that happens, then the current recession or depression for anybody who's not a white collar worker who can work from home is going to turn into a massive nationwide depression. That might provide the impetus, along with these other things, to flip America back out of oligarchy. We'll see. Do you think there's a direct line between the size of the income inequality gap and the increase in authoritarianism? As the rich get richer, do the poor get less free? Yes. Everybody gets less free. The people who have done a brilliant job of documenting this are Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett with the Equality Trust in the UK. They've done research around the world as well as in the United States, literally state by state analysis. They've written several books on this, The Spirit Level, Why Inequality Matters, and they've got a new one out. I don't recall the title right off the top of my head, but it's something about inequality. What they found is that what we're talking about here is not poverty, it's inequality. What they found is that as society has become more unequal, even if they don't experience poverty, as society has become more unequal, something breaks in people. We're wired for equality. You put a bunch of three-year-olds in a room and you give all the toys to one of the three-year-olds and the rest of them will freak out. We're wired for equality. When inequality gets really huge, society starts to break down. Change pregnancies explode, venereal diseases go up, homicides go up, all forms of crime go up, divorce goes up, mental illness goes up, oddly enough, something that you would not think is necessarily culturally mediated. There's this whole spectrum of social distress indicators that start exploding and blinking red really fast as inequality passes through various stages. Right now, in the developed world, the United States is the most unequal society in the developed world. UK is number two and everybody else is way, way behind. The reason why, of course, is Reaganism and Thatcherism is dropping the top tax bracket from 74% here and from in the 60s in the UK down into the 20s right now here and the 30s for individuals. I'm not sure what it is in the UK, but the same effect. Reagan and Wilkerson have documented that brilliantly. Yeah. I think this aligns a lot with our own thinking and research, which is that what people fail to acknowledge, I think certainly academic economists do, is that humans are wetware. We are creatures, biological creatures that evolved over millions of years and our success is a consequence of high levels of cooperation, which in turn rely on very particular kinds of justice and fairness because you can't cooperate if things aren't fair and just. That's why the differences, stretching a society apart economically, shreds the reciprocity norms that make social cohesion possible. That's what, and we're witnessing that right now in our country. Yeah. In fact, one of the most interesting that Wilkerson and Bickett have documented and they can show state to state variations in the United States and country to country, various around the world, is that as inequality goes up, trust, interpersonal trust and trust in government. Yeah, goes down. Absolutely. And so does happiness, right? Because humans are status seeking creatures and in a society where everybody's doing reasonably well and not too differently, even if you're relatively poor, people are relatively happier. But in a society where most people are doing terribly relative to a privileged few, people are pissed off. It's not so much, I don't think, status as survival. From that regard, I don't think we're wired that differently than other mammals. They did a fascinating study back in the 70s at Michigan State University. Squirrels typically make nests in trees and you can see them in the winter when the trees lives their leaves. And so what these researchers did, there are all these hardwood trees all over the MSU campus. And what they did was they took a couple of the squirrels' nests and added leaves to them. They increased their size by about 20%. But they didn't increase the size of the rest of the squirrels' nests. And what they found was that over the next six months, all the other squirrel nests got larger too. In other words, all the squirrels had to keep up with the Joneses. And this was piggyback on research that they had been doing for years on the size of these squirrels' nests and other animal burrows relative to climate because Michigan has pretty hard winters. And what they found was that the squirrels were actually predicting how severe the winter was going to be. So they'd build bigger nests when the winter was going to be harsher. And nobody to this day understands exactly how squirrels know that. There's a lot of things that they're probably paying attention to, changes in atmospheric pressure or precipitation or whatever. God only knows. But the squirrels can kind of predict it. So when the squirrels noticed that some of the other squirrels had bigger nests, they at some level just assumed, oh my God, Ralph over there knows something about the winter that's coming that I don't. I better get ready. So we have this instinct wired into us. This is part of a million DNA. And so when we see people who are living wildly luxuriant lifestyles, it's not a matter of I'm jealous of that person because I want what they want. There's something much deeper and more visceral. There's a sense that's rarely articulated. Most people are completely unconscious of this. But there's a sense that I'm not as prepared to survive what may be coming in the winter as that person is. And that freaks me out. Yeah. Well, I mean, we could devote our entire podcast to discussing this particular thing, but I think there's a lot of social science that indicates that people are pretty status conscious too. But. Oh yeah. No, I'm not. What I'm saying is that I'm absolutely agreeing with you. And I'm saying that the foundation of status consciousness actually has a survival instinct. Oh, it's a survival instinct. Oh, absolutely. And if this is baked into our DNA, which is why economic policy matters so much more in human terms than it does if you look at it on a spreadsheet and think, you know, like why, you know, this view that, you know, well, let them eat iPhones. It just doesn't work, right? It's not enough to give people an iPhone. They actually want to feel like they're doing reasonably well relative to others. And that's why inequality is so dangerous to democracies. So given recent events, you know, as sad as it may be, folks like you and us who have been warning about this for a very long time are now both in a position of having to say, we told you so, but also, you know, I think it's really important to be pointing the way towards solutions. So let's talk about that. Like where should we go from here? Eat the rich. Yeah, that's pretty much it. Seriously, I don't mean it, you know, literally, but there's a very simple solution. Franklin Roosevelt imposed it in the 1930s. You raise the top tax bracket up to 90% or even 74%, which is where it was when Reagan came into power. Even over 50% seems to stabilize economies very rapidly and diminish inequality. So you raise that top tax bracket, you raise the top brackets for the inheritance tax, the estate tax that Teddy Roosevelt put into place back in the first decade and hundreds. And you institute a wealth tax. Now, with regard to wealth tax, there's a two step thing here. Most Americans when you say wealth tax, they think, oh my God, you're going to tax things that I own, my wealth. That's terrible. We can't do that. We never did that in America. That's the kind of feedback you get. But the fact of the matter is I pay a wealth tax every year. The largest store of wealth that I have is my house. And that's true of most middle class Americans. And every year I pay here in Portland, I think it's around 4% of the value of my house, I pay in property taxes. That's a wealth tax. But there is no similar wealth tax on the largest store of Charles Koch's wealth, you know, his money bin. Yeah, what we need to do is have a money bin tax basically. If roughly 70% of American families who own their own homes and the other 30% who are renting, excluding homeless people, who are also paying property taxes indirectly in the rent. We're all paying a wealth tax every single year that's well over 1% in almost every state in the country. Then why don't we ask billionaires to pay a wealth tax on their largest share of wealth, whatever that may be. So I have never heard that framed in that way. And I must say that's a very powerful narrative. So say you're Joe Biden and you have a slim lead in the House, 50 plus one votes in the Senate, and you have decided to make dismantling oligarchy your number one priority. What could you realistically do first? I think the three things that I just laid out, they need to be sold to the American public. He needs to be doing like Franklin Roosevelt every week. Franklin Roosevelt did a fireside chat. Obama did not do this. Bill Clinton was a little better with the media, but Obama kind of just stayed in the background and was quiet most. Even when even when Merrick Garland was being trashed by Mitch McConnell, you know, Obama could have held a daily press conference yelling about it, but he chose not to. I am very hopeful that Biden does not try to reinvent the administration that he was the number two in. And instead, he uses FDR as his role model, or for that matter, Donald Trump as his role model. You know, speak to the American people regularly. Make your case, make it in succinct pithy points. I think I've made some of those points. Every working class American pays a wealth tax. Why not the billionaires? You know, why is it that the share of income paid in taxes for average working people is, you know, billionaires pay well less than five or 10% of their share of income compared to the average person. The numbers are even different from that. I'm sorry. I shouldn't just pull numbers out. But, you know, and basically just boil this stuff down and pitch it. Bernie does a really, really good job of this. Joe Biden should bring him in as an advisor, frankly, because if we don't deal with this inequality crisis that we have in the United States, we're going to continue to have, and you're going to see even worse versions of our lack of trust crisis. Yeah. And America loves a billionaire, though. Like I think it was last week, Elon Musk passed Jeff Bezos to become the richest person in the world. And it occurred to me that if I were to start a Kickstarter to raise funds to get Jeff Bezos back above Elon Musk, there would be a non-zero number of people who would donate to that fund. It seems to me to be a uniquely American issue. Is there anything you think that people can do to directly convince people that what is in the best interest of billionaires is not in their own best interest? Because anybody who's gotten into a fight online can tell you that people love to carry the water for billionaires. Yeah. Well, I think saying it the way you just said it is a good start. I think that we have this Disney view of kings and kingdoms and great wealth, which is the American analog to that, that bubble needs to be punctured. That myth needs to be broken up, if that makes sense. I'm not sure exactly how to do it, but I think that our media, the way that our media characterizes great wealth, which shows billions and things like that, doesn't quite capture the reality of it. No, for sure not. I'm just interested in your perspective on this. Our podcast is devoted to mostly the way in which the economics profession has aided and abetted this crisis over the last 45, 50 years. The way in which neoclassical economics and the weaponized ideological extension of that, which we call neoliberalism, has infected the brains of people both on the right and left and left us with a set of policies that lead inevitably... Neoliberalism is effectively a protection racket for the very rich, as is neoclassical economics. I'm interested in how you see that. How you think about the connection between that and oligarchy? Well, there's a feedback loop there that produces a cycle that starts spinning at the ground level and then as it spins faster and faster and wider and wider, goes higher and higher up, like a helicopter. That cycle is that you get very, very wealthy people who discover that there are some economists who are saying things that would help them enhance their wealth. The example in my mind is Joe Coors and the Skaife family and Chicago School Economist. Yeah. Milton Friedman. Milton Friedman and that crowd and they're all- Here's Phil the Friedman. He's like this obscure guy in the late 1950s, early 1960s. He's considered a crackpot. He starts getting funded by some very rich people and they raise his profile. Even to the point of funding a deal with a bank to create an economic prize in memorial of Alfred Nobel that has nothing to do with the Nobel Committee in Norway. This is out of Sweden. So that they can give a Nobel Prize to Milton Friedman. The billionaires find their economists, their economists then get lifted into the public sphere and their ideas get promoted by the billionaires. Their ideas cause changes in tax policy and economic policy that shovel more wealth to the billionaires. So now they don't have this one economist or even a small group of economists. Now you've got a situation where the Koch network for the last 30 years has actually been funding departments of economics and political science in colleges all over the country. Then you're producing brand new economists and lawyers and politicians who believe that oligarchy is actually the best form of government, which is basically the sales life living on in if the rules were different for the richest team versus the poorest team. At first it might seem interesting, and eventually you'd end up with just a couple of teams that were very, very rich, and that kind of might seem interesting. But the game itself, the appeal of the game, would completely collapse, and eventually football would eventually collapse. I mean, it would go through what would appear to be kind of golden period, and then it would collapse. And frankly, I think that's where we're at right now, because the rules of the game of economics are defined by politics, which has been captured by one particular economic player, the very, very rich and large corporation, two economic players. And history just shows that doesn't stand. That's the other thing too. In 1770, there was a massive depression in the English-speaking world that was a result of the French-Indian wars ending two years earlier. And there was no more demand for war materials. I mean, there was a massive depression in 1770 that led right to the American Revolution. There was a massive depression in 1856. Abraham Lincoln had been paid for his work by a railroad, and he literally ran to the bank to turn it into cash, because he knew this was coming the next day most of the banks in America closed in 1856, or at least in Illinois, and where he lived at the time. And that panic of 1856 led right to the Civil War. You've got the Great Depression. The Great Depression hit the United States and Germany equally hard. We had FDR as a president, but Germany had Hitler. Boom, World War II, caused by a depression in large part. And here we are again. So these things are self-correcting, but the correction process can be brutal. We ask all of our guests why they do this work. We've had you on the show before, and I've asked you that question. So I thought I'd get a little more specific. Why did you choose now to focus on oligarchy? Because I feel that we are at that crisis point. We're at that 1929, 1856, 1770 turning point that to a large extent is being defined by economics and the oligarchic class. And if we are well-informed about how these things work and lessons of history, we can make it through. If we're not well-informed, then we end up like Germany did in 1935. Given recent events, I think we should all be very sober. And it's not impossible that these are end of days. No, we are at the cusp, or close to the cusp, of a major turning point in American history. The question is which way is it going to turn. And I'm trying to figure that it should turn it in the direction of the ideals of the Declaration of Independence, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, rather than Thomas Hobbes' vision of you've got to have a brutal state in order to maintain social order, which is obviously Trump moving to. Yeah. Well, Tom, thank you so much for joining us. Thank you so much. Thank you for your work. And we hope to talk to you again soon. Well, thank you for having me anytime. That was a super interesting conversation. Didn't have a lot of nice things to say about my people though, did he? No, no. Are you okay? Are your feelings hurt a little bit? Was it eat the rich? He did say eat the rich. Yeah. Oh, go moisturizing because yeah, be a little gamey. Exactly. First, marinate them in buttermilk for 24 hours, then eat them. So how do you feel about that thesis statement? You know, the sad part is, and again, when I'm thinking about this stuff right now, I'm definitely thinking about it in the context of what happened in our nation's capital and just the extraordinary seditious behavior of so many Republicans and just the fact that, I've been saying for a long time, the pitchforks are coming. And what's really top of mind for me right now is that I've been talking about this stuff and warning people for a while that a pluralistic, democratic, stable civil society can't survive if inequality gets too extreme. And the truth is that with virtually no exceptions, my peers will not face this. Mm-hmm. Like I've talked to dozens, maybe hundreds of wealthy people about engaging in projects or programs or politics directly that will begin to recast how we organize society. And I cannot tell you the number of plutocrats I've talked to who are like, do we have to save the middle class? Absolutely. But when you tell them what's necessary to do that, like pay people more or pay higher taxes, they're like, oh, fuck that. Well, I didn't think you mean that. Right? Like, that's crazy. What's incredibly depressing is that otherwise intelligent people don't have the psychological capacity to recognize that the system that has so benefited them and has created these pathologies, like that these things are connected, that the people who have benefited the most may be responsible also for the pathologies. Right? They simply cannot bring themselves to believe that in order for the country to do better, they may have to do slightly worse. Right? It's just it's so, it creates so much cognitive dissonance that they can't bring themselves to accept that. And to be clear, the doing worse is not like moving into a smaller house or anything like that. No, no. It involves absolutely no trade-offs in terms of how they live. But the idea of paying more taxes or having to pay your people enough to get by without food stamps. And I guess what it does lead me to is that if you really do want to solve this problem, you are actually going to have to eat the rich. It is probably true that every billionaire is a policy failure in a democracy. Like, I can't remember who said that. I think it was one of AOC's people, but it's probably literally true. And that's just really depressing because you want to believe that the people at the top could see themselves to more directly participating in keeping the whole society together, even if it involved some direct trade-offs. And they can't. I can tell you for certain that I've talked to like jillions of them. And there are a couple of notable exceptions, not very many, but they think that if they vote for Democrats, that's as far as they need to go. But if we're honest with ourselves, there is not yet any direct evidence that Democrats will solve this problem. Well, yeah. I mean, we're recording this now before Joe Biden's inauguration to be clear. Certainly, if you look over the last 40 years, sure. Yes. There's not a lot of great evidence that the Democratic Party is going to effectively become the, I mean, Paul, you know, like we're Democrats and we're super involved in that, give a lot of money away to Democrats and all that stuff. But the truth is that if the people don't organize directly around making these changes, then the Democratic Party is unlikely to be the only place where this change comes from. So anyway, I don't know. I just, it is definitely, I think everybody in the country who has a brain is reflecting and buy some buttermilk, I guess, would be my advice. We've really gone on a journey today. And I think that to better understand how we wound up here and how our opinions are changing about oligarchy and the rich, I think you should definitely check out Hidden History of American Oligarchy. It's part of a series of these books that he does. The research is really incredible. It's written in very simple language, but it's full of all kinds of great information about America's history. And it's available where all books are sold, although I personally would recommend you bought it from an independent bookstore rather than Amazon. Next week on Pitchfork Economics, we're going to answer all your questions in another Ask Me Anything episode. Looking forward to it. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.