 David Sloan Wilson has written basically a rebuttal to Atlas Shrugged called Atlas Hugged. And just imagine what it would be like if that novel succeeded to the degree of Rand's novel and just became a fictional cosmology. What if it had the impact of Atlas Shrugged? Just think about that. You mean millions of people just kind of following its philosophy without thinking it through? From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. So Nick, you're only a few years older than me. And for late boomers like us, when we were in high school, there was this book that you just had to read, people told us. I couldn't get through it, but did you read Atlas Shrugged? I did read Atlas Shrugged. My dad recommended that I read it when I was in high school. I must have been 16, 17. My dad was a very intellectual person and had read basically every book, but he thought it was an important book to read, but also he dismissed it as nonsense. But he just said, look, dude, you got to read this because everybody does. And I do remember reading it and having it. I was a little bit puzzled by it, but it's been so long that what is interesting is that for a particular personality type, people who came out of the womb as sort of selfish and non-empathetic, boy, did it speak to them. It was like, oh, you mean the more dickish I am, the better off everyone else will be? You're describing teenagers. I mean, come on. This by the way is why this appeals to 16, 17-year-olds. Yeah, I'm also describing lots of investment bankers and software entrepreneurs. Oh my God, yeah. And look, Atlas Shrugged was a way to package up the most potent and appealing ideas in sort of neoclassical economics and neoliberalism, and it was a very effective way to get the word out. And persuade people that these ideas were both true and morally valid, I guess, and helped propel the neoliberal movement along. I believe even Milton Friedman required his associates to read it. They were close friends. That's right. He was part of her salon, as was former Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan. So big fans of Ayn Rand knew her personally. And the importance of this terrible little book, and I say that because really, as a work of fiction, as a piece of art, it's not very good. But it's incredibly influential, and it speaks to one of the themes that we've touched on since the very beginning of the Pitchfork Economics podcast, Nick. And that is the importance of narrative, not just in shaping the way we understand the world, but in reshaping the world itself through that reflexive process. What we believe about the world actually changes how we interact with it and ends up changing the world, which influences what we believe about the world. And this book has played an outsized role in creating a lot of the problems we're living through today. That's right. And today on our podcast, we get to visit with our old friend, David Sloan Wilson, the evolutionary biologist, who has written basically a rebuttal to Atlas Rugg, called Atlas Hugg. And the reason David's book is consequential is that I think it more accurately reflects both what people are really like and what the true sources of prosperity and stability are in human societies, which is altruism and reciprocity and cooperation. So with that, let's chat with David. My name is David Sloan Wilson. I'm an evolutionist and I'm plugging my newest book, my first novel, Atlas Hugg. I've known you a long time. Goldie's known you a long time. We've certainly known of you for an even longer time, but no one ever knew that you were the spawn of a great novelist. So we had no idea. Well, my dad was a very famous novelist of his day, and that day was the same era as Ayn Rand. And so her novel, Atlas Shrug, was published in 1957. And my dad's most famous novels, The Man in the Great Planal Suit and A Summer Place, were published in 1955 and 1957. And they're still discussed today as basically putting his finger on the generation, the corporate army that formed after World War II, and changing sexual wars during the same period. So when I grew up, my dad was a household word. The movies had Gregory Peck and Tread Donahue and Sandra Dee, and so there were major blockbuster movies. And imagine what that was like for a skinny little kid growing up with just a completely larger than life dad. I did become a scientist to escape his shadow, but at the same time, I retained that sort of novelistic urge to understand the human condition. And the moment I saw that evolutionary theory could be used to study the human condition, I could do that through the lens of a theory rather than through the lens of my personal experience. And I was just drawn to these themes of altruism and pro-sociality and so on as my scientific subject matter. And loved to write. And so I wrote nonfiction and people tell me that my nonfiction books are very story-like, so I imported some of my dad's talents into that. But writing a novel, oh man, I have to tell you, that was just for me, this homecoming that hard to describe what an intense and positive experience it was. So for our listeners who either have not read Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand, or who read it when they were 16, can you kind of outline both the storyline and the dominant narrative of that very important book? Yeah, so let's just do the storyline. It focuses on a brilliant engineer named John Galt. The phrase, who is John Galt, is I think the first sentence of the book. And he is basically, and Ayn Rand's characters were about the heroic individual, that there's a special class of men, always men, that are the doers of the world. And then everyone else is a moocher and a parasite and they don't understand that the source of their welfare are these doers. And so John Galt claims to be able to create a machine, an engine that runs off of static electricity, claims to provide an inexhaustible source of clean energy. He reminds me a little bit of Elon Musk, basically. No task too audacious. Anything can be done. But he ends up leaving, going on strike, and he starts a strike of doers, which brings society to a halt, is the thumbnail sketch of Atlas Shrugged. And so it was the embodiment of the heroic individual who pushes against all odds. Would either of you like to add to that? Yeah. I mean, that story is the origin story of sort of neoliberal trickle down memes like the job creators, right? Makers and takers. Makers and takers. Of course, the story is as old as humanity and Plato had a human topography that matched that of gold, silver, and bronze people. But the Ayn Rand version is very neoliberal in the sense that it's very economic. And according to her and her acolytes, they're the good people that number just the few and they're almost always white men. And everybody else needs to bow down to them and anything that's good for them is good for the society. And anything that's good for anyone else will drag the society down. Will harm the very people it's intended to help. Well, it's very much free markets. Anything of value can be represented as a dollar value. And so the way to provide value is to provide what people are most willing to pay for. And so the market basically becomes the new morality substitutes for all of the conventional virtues. The word give was banned from the vocabulary of the utopian community founded by John Galt. So yeah, this has become the sort of the Bible of the free market thinking. And yet at the same time, I think it's important to stress that if Ayn Rand never existed, that individualistic mentality would still be just as strong. On the one hand, she was hugely influential. But on the other hand, the tradition of individualism that she gave voice to is the dominant tradition of the last 70 years and would exist just as strongly if Ayn Rand never existed. So it's important that the target of our critique needs to be individualism in all its forms, not just Ayn Rand's particular novel. Right. And so you were inspired by you to create. Yeah, like it was at the 2000, it was 2011. We were at Duke doing a conference on evolution and economics. And it was at that workshop that you or Eric said, well, you know, Ayn Rand was so successful at promulgating this through fiction. Somebody should be writing a follow up to Atlas Schrod and the novelist within me said, yeah, that's right. It'll be called Atlas Hugg. The protagonist will be the grandson of John Galt, whose father John Galt, too, is a Rush Limbaugh character. And Ayn Rand, I'll transport her into my novel. She'll be Ayn Rand. She'll be John Galt III's grandmother. And it was and it was off from there. The plot line just emerged right during that meeting. But a lot of water has gone under the bridge, 10 years worth. And I'd really like to think a little bit about what has changed, how much progress has been made and how much progress remains to be made. So I think some things have changed. It has never been, I think, more clear why neoclassical economics is a failure and in many ways has had a super corrosive effect on human societies and equally clear what the alternative is. And at the center of that alternative is understanding human economies and human societies as evolutionary systems that can evolve in pro-social productive ways, but also can evolve in antisocial and nonproductive ways. I would say I divide what has changed, what has progressed, what has evolved, we'll use that word, into two categories. One is the science, if you can use that word about economics. What we know, we know a lot more about human behavior. We know a lot more about economic policies and how they really interact in the real world, minimum wage being a great example of that. There's just a lot more evidence that orthodox economics is wrong about things. But the other thing that I, and I think this gets back to your book, David, that has changed, the narrative has evolved a lot over the past, just the past six years that I've been heavily involved certainly over the past 10. And that's one of the things that's exciting to me about seeing your book. There's no stronger form of narrative than fiction. And we haven't had that on our side. That's right. So just take us through the plot line of your book, Atlas Hugged. Atlas Hugged begins with a freely altered version of Atlas Shrugged. There was a John Galt one. He did claim to be able to create a static electricity machine, but of course that was a folly. You couldn't do it. He did form a utopian community, which fell apart immediately. And Ayn Rand joined that community and she developed a cosmology, which although everything else John Galt one tried was a failure. Ayn Rand's Better Than Real cosmology was a survivor that had been propagated around the world by a famous speech, which itself was a hoax on the airways. And then they had a child and that child became basically a collaborator with Ayn Rand and he built her objectivist philosophy into a social media empire. And then John Galt three rebelled against all of that. Well John Galt two got married to someone who became disenchanted with the movement right off. And she managed to divorce John Galt two and steal 10% of his wealth, which passed to John Galt three. You then grew up expecting that some great thing was expected of him and that he was going to challenge his father's evil empire. So there's a kind of a dash of Star Wars here with the son rebelling against the evil father. And so where to go from here. And so he discovers evolution as a kind of a secret of life. And I'm amused by that because secret of life is sort of a catchphrase that people use as if you can go to some wise man in a cave and he'll tell you the secret of life. So when you think of evolutionary theory as the secret of life and one that can actually be used in everyday life to guide our policies, then there's a nice double meaning there. And so to make a long story short, he actually succeeds in catalyzing the process of cultural evolution and bringing about a worldwide transformation in 100 days. And just imagine what it would be like if that novel succeeded to the degree of Rand's novel and just became a fictional cosmology to match, you know, for our time to match. What if it had the impact of Adler Schrock? Just think about that. You mean millions of people just kind of following its philosophy without thinking it through? Because that's. Okay, I'll take that. I'll take that. Why not? Why not? Let's talk about, well, let's talk about that. The reason for writing this book, the importance of narrative and the importance of using fiction to transmit a narrative. We've always worked in our office with the idea that politics is downstream of culture. And so if you can talk a little bit about why narrative is so important. Absolutely. And this gets evolutionary real fast. My former student, John Gottschul wrote a book called The Story Telling Animal, how stories make us human. Fantastic, fantastic book, by the way. It is a fantastic, fantastic book. And it has to do with the fact that we're such a symbolic species. If we want to get scientific-y about it, we can talk about such things as dual inheritance theory and stuff like that. But what it really means is that because we're human, our symbolic meaning systems are very much like our genes. And so each and every person is a collection of genes. We call that their genotype, their genes influence everything you could measure about them. We call that their phenotype. So you have your genotype-phenotype relationship. But then, because we're humans, we also have our meaning systems. Let's call it our symbol type. And that symbol type influences everything we do. The very same phenotype is influenced by our genes. And our symbol types and our genotypes interact with each other, not only through evolutionary time but also in our lifetimes, for example, by upregulating and downregulating our genetic expressions. And so you could really think about what we have in our heads as formative of what we do like our genes, usually conveyed in stories. So what we think matters. And in the form of narrative, most of the time, there's something about a story that can be much more impactful in how you think than in just intellectual discourse. And so this maybe is why neoclassical economics has been so influential because it's essentially a fiction. Yeah. Well, I mean, and it has been weaponized into a set of memes and narratives that have been enormously persuasive and have shaped the culture. And I want to bring the conversation back to economics and why this is so consequential for economics and the shape of human societies. Because what neoclassical economics and neoliberalism and Atlas shrugged, taught the culture was that selfishness was the cause of prosperity. That's the main message that humans are reliably selfish creatures. And it is that selfishness that is the cause of the prosperity you see around you. And by extension, the people who are most selfish, like the character John Galt, are the most prosperity creating folks in the society and should be taken seriously and worshiped effectively. And the thing is, is that we now know with essentially scientific certainty that that is actually not what human beings are intrinsically like at all, that we evolved over millions of years to be altruistic cooperators mostly, other regarding reciprocal and intuitively moral. And thus it is broad scale cooperation that is the source of prosperity in human societies. That is the indispensable sort of human economic characteristic. And all of that reminds me of our favorite David Sloan Wilson quote, which I think is really worth surfacing in this conversation because it speaks to the tension between selfishness and cooperation, which is that selfishness beats altruism within groups and altruistic groups beat selfish groups. Everything else is commentary. And I think that you did write a book, which is a response David to this sort of narrative of selfishness and individualism, but you're not saying you're not making a collectivist argument either, right? Absolutely not. And I think that that's one of the important points that has to be made. And when we toggle back and forth between the fictional world and the real world, now we're in the real world, I often say there's two things that don't work. One is purely as a fair because it's just not true that everyone pursuing their self-interest benefits the common good. But the other thing that never works is centralized planning. And so it's very important to say that every socialist experiment that's been tried, not only at the national scale, but also at the scale of business and kind of command and control top down centralized planning doesn't work. Why? Because the world is too complex to be understood by any group of experts. And so centralized planning doesn't work. Purely as a fair doesn't work. What does work? Not just something down the middle, but actually an explicit process of cultural evolution in which we have systemic goals in mind. We orient variation around the target of selection, and then we identify and replicate best practices. We have to be basically consciously evolving. Our future is the only way that we can go about doing it. What I'm trying to do, what I think it's important to do for our listeners is try to connect in a more explicit way. Why understanding an economy or human society as an evolutionary system is so essential to understanding how we should organize policy to maximize welfare. One of the big questions that we get in our podcast a lot is that often our listeners are super confused about our enthusiasm for markets and capitalism, which they see as having been super harmful to lots and lots of people and lots and lots of things and the planet and everything else. The answer is evolution because properly organized markets are a super effective evolutionary system for solving human problems, and if the target of selection is right, then we create pro-social solutions that actually improve people's lives and we minimize the harm that we do in the process. That's the best way of organizing a human society yet invented, and it beats the crap out of any form of statism or central planning. That's why it's important. I affirm that, and so it's very affirmative to an enlightened capitalist mindset. The way I would play that back would be to say that if positive cultural evolution is going to take place, all kinds of changes are required, and those changes are a form of competition, better practices have to replace worse practices, and it has to happen faster than ever before. Where do those new ideas come from? Well, let it be entrepreneurial. Let it be inclusive. Let the ideas come from everywhere, but as long as we structure markets so that that's basically where all that entrepreneurial energy flows in the direction of, then that's what we've done. That's what we mean by a target of selection. When we talk about orienting variation around the target, we're talking about letting a thousand flowers bloom and let the ideas come from everywhere. Those three ingredients, selection, variation, replication, that's what needs to be done, but the amount of work that's required in order to do it at a large scale, and ultimately it must be the planetary scale, that's another implication, is that the system has to be the whole planetary system. Anything less will create problems of the scale. This conversation raises a question for me, David, and I'm wondering if in writing a novel you struggled with what I see as a narrative asymmetry between our view of how the world works and the objectivist, neoliberal, neoclassical view. Neoclassical economics, the orthodox economics is actually really straightforward and simple. It presents the market as this tool for transubstantiating selfishness into the common good, self-interest into the common good. That is a very simple story and it's also really compelling because it's like, oh, I can be self-interested and it's good for people, that it's easy. I don't have to sacrifice anything. I can just be as individualistic as I want, whereas the prosocial view of the world, it's a lot more complex. I'm just wondering how you went about, it's one thing to critique Ayn Rand's construction of the world. I'm wondering how you went about taking your scientific view of how society and the economy worked and putting it into a story. Well, let me push back on some of the, for one thing, economics is anything but simple if you actually take an economics course, it's bewildering. There's a simple narrative that you could make out of read is good, but think of all the other powerful narratives, the more conventional narratives such as Christianity, which managed to be compelling and then to basically to inculcate prosociality and altruism. In the actual novel, John Pouy goes to college and he figures he's got to take economics in order to combat his father's evil empire. He flunks that course. So he feels deeply, deeply fraudulent. Then he has to hit rock bottom before he takes Howard Head's Secret of Life course. Howard Head just makes everything clear in a single lecture, variation, selection, replication, not so hard to understand, and he pulls out this instant expertise on the first day of class. So John Gallipoli feels saved because at last he has a theory that makes sense of the world from day one. The idea that evolution provides a transcendent knowledge, a point that I communicated in my nonfiction books, this is true. That's why Thomas Huxley said, how stupid of me not to have thought of that. There's actually a toolkit that's so simple that anyone can master it and provides the kind of instant expertise that enabled Darwin from day one to make sense of everything that he turned his eyes upon, including the human condition. So I can almost turn the tables on that and say that we have the simple narrative. We have the intuitive narrative once we are able to construct it. Ayan Rand, her goal in writing that book, it feels like, was to leave the reader with a very particular conception of what an ideal form of human behavior was, like what you should be like as a person. If you had to summarize how you think someone should behave going through life and in the world, how do you characterize that? I just want to underscore that her view was perfect individualism, pure selfishness. You're actually not arguing for pure altruism. You're arguing for something more nuanced. But what is it? How would you describe it? Well, I describe it with a stack of symbols that is on the cover of the book and also in real life would describe it as multi-level selection. But in the book, in the novel, there is a symbolic representation of the true objectivist movement as a stack of symbols with the earth on top, underneath that, the American flag. Underneath that, there's a circle. And underneath that, there's a dot. And so the earth, of course, stands for a whole earth ethic. First and foremost, we should be regarding ourselves as human beings and citizens of the earth. That should be the primary social identity. Now, that doesn't make other identities go away, not by any means. The point, the dot at the bottom is the individual. That's not the least of it. That's in some ways the most of it. The whole system is to make individuals thriving. But the way to do that is for individuals to form into groups. And a very central message, both in the book and in real life, is the small group as a fundamental unit of human society. Large-scale society must be multicellular. And the cell is not the individual. It's the small, purposeful, and appropriately structured group. And I think that's one of the biggest differences between individualism in all of its forms and multilevel selection theory is the identification of the small, purposeful group as a fundamental unit. And what we can do right away is to reconstitute that level of human society. And then what the American flag represents is all our current institutions of all kinds that are needed in order to translate global policy. What's good for the globe has to be translated into what's good for the nation, cities, and so on. And so that's the total conception, which is, I mean, I'm trying to ask, is that more complicated than what economics is telling us? I don't know. But since the individualistic economics failed, it's not really material. The main question is, can this multilevel view be communicated in a way which is compelling? And if I did my job as a storyteller, then it has. Well, listen, it has been so great to catch up. Right. Oh, we always have to ask our final question, which is Goldie. Why do you do this work? No, I mean, the pro-social impulse, that's a good way to end you guys, because I think that the idea that we're all selfish, fundamentally selfish, of course, is the idea that we're combating. And when you think that pro-sociality, the desire to help others and all of us can be as deeply rooted as the desire just to do well for oneself. So I'm motivated pro-socially. I'm an empath. So what gets me out of that is the idea that there actually is a way to make this world better. There is a path, you might say, and that is as motivating for me as any religious belief that I know. What I want to do is I want to create a cosmology and a meaning system, which is as motivational as any other belief system that's out there, but in this case, motivates the correct behaviors because it's science-driven. I love it. It's a fantastic answer, actually. Well, David, thank you so much for being with us. Thank you. Can't wait for the next book. Well, that's it. I actually don't wait for that. Just read the one I just wrote. And gifted, gifted, not sold, available only on atlashug.world, and all proceeds going, anything you wish to give in return goes to support my nonprofit pro-social world where we attempt to implement all of this in the real world. That was a wide-ranging interview, but if I had to sum it up, I just think that the thing about atlashugged the novel and Ayn Rand's view of the world and certainly Milton Friedman's view of the world and Alan Greenspan's view of the world, and they don't see it as an evolutionary system. They see it as this mechanical, hierarchical system that have at the center the doers or the makers or the job creators or whatever it is. Individuals. Yeah, individuals rather than- The Thatcher said there is no society, there's just individuals and families. Families, right. Right. And that's just objectively false. That's just not how human societies operate, and that view does not explain where prosperity, stability, and security come from. And David's novel, particularly for people who have not wasted their time as we have, including the very technical particulars of all of this, it's a great way to explore these issues and get an intuitive sense for what's right and what's wrong. When you look at these two books in comparison, when you look at Ayn Rand's philosophy as it's presented in atlashrugged and her other books, it basically just champions the individual as the fundamental unit of human society, whereas in David's evolutionary philosophy, and as he represents it in atlashrugged, it's that pro-social view that basically looks at the group as the fundamental unit of human society. And the thing that's really important is that whereas Ayn Rand pulled her view of the world out of the broader cultural muyu in which she was raised and which she found herself, David's pulling this out of actual science, that this is how we evolved. We evolved to exist and thrive within small groups of no more than 100, 150 individuals, often quite smaller than that. And as a species that could not survive on the individual level. We only survive. It wasn't just thriving within the group. It was the only way we survived because we're actually not that rugged an animal. We don't compete well with lions one on one, but as a group, we do quite well. And also competing with other groups of humans. Yeah, and it is remarkable how durable the myth of the rugged individual is given how objectively obvious it is that no individual on their own can survive, much less thrive. So anyway, fun conversation. David is always such a smart and interesting person, and hopefully he'll write some more fun books for us to talk about. So in the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we get to talk to our old friend Andrew Yang about his thoughts on economics and otherwise. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.