 Hey Pitchfork listeners, we're working on another Ask Me Anything episode and we need your questions for Nick and the team. What do you want to know? Call us at 731-388-9334, leave us a voicemail asking your question and we might just answer it on our next AMA episode of Pitchfork Economics. Again, that's 731-388-9334. Looking forward to hearing your questions. We get to talk to another class trader. That's right. We're going to talk to Jafar Shalci, who is a Danish entrepreneur and the founder of Millionaires for Humanity. People say I'm self-made. I always say that bullshit because nobody is self-made. How popular is your view among your peers in Denmark? Certainly got to be more popular than my peers here in the United States. Yeah, but you will be surprised. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. So, Nick, on this week's episode, we get to talk to another class trader. That's right. That's right. They come from all over. We're going to talk to Jafar Shalci, who is a Danish entrepreneur and the founder of Millionaires for Humanity, a network of wealthy people who are advocating for raising taxes on wealthy people. He's a super interesting, cool guy and definitely a fellow traveler. Yeah, and it's great timing too because Biden's tax plan has just been revealed. And it looks like he's going to propose eliminating the part of the Trump tax cut that lowered taxes on rich people like you. So, there's going to be a slight raise in the top marginal rate of the income tax from 37 to 38.6%. And the bigger news is essentially the elimination of the preferred rate for capital gains. You would be paying capital gains tax at that top rate as well. That's right. And I just got to ask you, Nick, I mean, if they eliminate that tax break for capital gains, where will you have the incentive to speculate in Bitcoin? Yeah, exactly. I mean, that sounds terrible. It does. It's going to destroy our entire crypto economy. It will. It will. But I've been a big advocate for a long time of equalizing income from investing and income from work. And just to be clear, he's not wholesale proposing increasing the cap gains rate. It's on income above a million a year. Right. So, for a lot of people who have capital gain, it will continue to be a relatively low rate. It's just for folks who make tens of millions or hundreds of millions or billions in some sort of capital gains windfall, they would have to pay at a rate equaling the rate that firefighter has to pay on their hard-earned income too. And I think that's totally appropriate. And I don't think at all it will disincentivize people from starting companies and trying to build wealth. In fact, using the usual neoliberal logic, it will make people work harder, because now you will have to work 25% harder to make the same amount of money. So all those rich people like me will now have to work even harder to create wealth, which is what the incentive system is supposed to do. And you've made another point over the years, Nick, that when you're as rich as you are, it's not about what you can buy with all that extra money. It's really just scorekeeping. That's right. It's how much you have relative to other people that matters. And this is why I think that a reasonable increase in the tax rates that wealthy people pay isn't going to have a material difference on anybody's lifestyle at the end of the day. The society will be better off, but there will still be a pecking order. And if $100 million apartments in New York City now can only fetch $60 million because people have to pay a little bit more tax, the same people will be buying those apartments, but the world will not be worse off as a consequence. I mean, maybe some property developer will be slightly worse off. Well, worse off in an accounting sense, but not in a real lived experience. Like Jeff Bezos has to pay more capital gains tax when he sells some shares to- There will be no difference in his life. No difference in his lifestyle. And same with you. I mean, it's not just the billionaires, it's the multimillionaires. Yeah. No, it won't make a big difference. We'll have slightly less and it'll be fine and we'll get by it. But the cool thing is, is that by reinstating some corporate taxes and reinstating some taxes on wealthy people, you could pay for, to the extent that you need to pay for these things, you could absolutely pay for, for instance, the American family plan that the Biden administration is proposing, which is 1.5 trillion in new spending to fight poverty and reduce childcare costs and big pre-K and community college free for all. And there's a lot of really incredible things that that money can go for that, honestly, I truly believe will improve the lived experience for every American. Right. It's nice to live in a society where people are not living on the street. And you raised an interesting point there. You also said to the extent that we need to pay for it. And we've talked about this on the podcast, that right now we're in a situation where we can afford to do a lot of things regardless of the taxes. We can afford to run large deficits right now to make the investments we need to without worrying about inflation. That said, there is an economic, political and social good that comes from closing the huge wealth and income inequality gaps just in and of itself. That's right. Raising taxes on the wealthy, even if we don't need the money, is a net positive because it is that huge and growing inequality that is corrupt and dangerous to a functional democracy. That's right. And when you have a class of people who live entirely different lives from the vast majority and have so much wealth and power, it's just not good for any society. And the other thing is that there's this very pervasive neoliberal view that taxing the rich is somehow punishing them. And it's all about envy. But the truth is that human beings were evolved to be social creatures. And we judge ourselves in relation to one another. And the higher amount of inequality that you have in a society, the farther apart you stretch the rungs of the ladder of opportunity so that people can't climb up that ladder, they basically have to leap from rung to rung. And it just gets harder and everybody gets more antagonized. And that sense that the system is rigged and there's no possibility of moving up that ladder is what drives all of the cynicism. And hate and political polarization we find in our society. And there's a reason that places like Sweden and Denmark are just more socially stable than the United States. And that is that the vast majority of citizens feel like the system works for them and they have a big stake in it. And that's the high order bit, I think, for the United States right now is to persuade at least two thirds of the country that the system works pretty well and treats most people fairly. And it's worth supporting. But given that, it will be fun to talk to another person who feels strongly like wealthy citizens should contribute more to the common good. Yeah. And just to be aware to listeners, Jafar is zooming from Denmark. So if the audio quality is a little shaky at times, please, please forgive us. My name is Jafar Sheltje. I was born in 61 and Tehran, Iran. But when I was only eight years old, my momma took me and my four siblings to Austria Vienna first of one year, and then Copenhagen. So I live in Scandinavia for the last five decades. I'm a building engineer and work in the real estate. So I make properties, apartments and so on. And in 2015, at the same time that we had the 17 SDG goals adopted the UN, we started our foundation called Human Act. And we are now pursuing this by a new network called Mediumness for Humanity. So Jafar, like me, you've been outspoken about advocating for higher taxes on the rich. What's wrong with us? Yeah, you mean what's wrong with us people, human beings? You and me. No, the two of you class traitors. Yeah. Yeah. Do you know what? I just think that we are not civilized yet. And the rich people are just that they have this sickness called greed. We cannot have enough. We just have to have more until we destroy our planet. So that is some of the things that is wrong with us. So and we are very good to manipulating the governments, manipulating the sex system. Some of us don't pay at all in Texas. So I could actually go on for hours of what is wrong with us. So we've had on the podcast before, Abigail Disney, who was born into wealth and is advocating for higher taxes on the wealthy. That's not your story. You weren't born into it. Tell us a bit about how you built your own wealth and how much of that was your your own initiative and how much of that was the society you were raised in? Yeah, first of all, she's a wonderful woman. I met her in New York in 2019. And she's also inspired me of what I'm doing today. As I told you before, I came to Denmark when I was only eight, nine years old. And soon after we came to Denmark, actually my parents divorced. So the first year was an orphanage with my siblings. And then after with my mother find a job as a hotel cleaner, we get back to her and live with my mother, with our mother the rest of the time. But the incredible thing was that we was just placed in one of the most beautiful places on this planet. And it was Copenhagen, a part of Scandinavia where we have that we call the welfare system. As my mother said, you can do whatever you want to do, because the society, the welfare system in Denmark, you can have free education, healthcare system, you have good security, good workers, and so on and so on. So I just got to school and worked hard and became a building engineer and started my own business in the 99 after I had worked for more than 10 years in a big building company to learn the job. So I will say that the society, miniature and it is before me that had built the system in Denmark as a big part of it. So when I hear especially rich people say I'm self-made, I always say that's bullshit because nobody is self-made. Everybody is directed by the society, their friends and so on and so on. And in Scandinavia, we had the system to thank for. So it was just for me normal to give back and do the right thing. Of course, we made the, I worked hard and so on. So we really have the American dream in Scandinavia. So self-made like Donny Deutsches self-made. That was actually quite funny when I. Yeah. Would you tell that story? It's just so good. It's so good. The story is actually that one of my friends in the US that told me that he was the national television in the US and said that he used Denmark as a, you know, a scary picture and that he was communist and that the US should never look like Denmark. And I said, hey, I had to write to do something about this. So I just sit down and put some words on the paper and cut it out the social media. And it's just get, yeah, I think more than a hundred thousand likes. And it was all about he didn't knew anything about what was going on in Denmark on Scandinavia. And he don't know anything about the welfare system. But I think the key point here was that the, your, your antagonist, this guy, Donny Deutsch in his interview on Bill Maher said, you know, my dad was a cop and we worked hard and here I am. But the truth is his dad may have been a cop, but after that, he started and ran a giant advertising company that his son inherited largely. And that's where his success came from. Not from, you know, like it just was so disingenuous. I was shocked that I heard what he has to say, but yeah, it was just kind of funny, but he didn't, he never invited him actually to come to Copenhagen, but he never answered me. And I tried some several times, but yeah, let's see. It's a funny story, but it is, I think, deeply typical of the view that people have about themselves. And, you know, psychologists will tell you, and this is paraphrasing, that everyone needs to be the hero of their own story. And so people create narratives around their success that make it moral and the richer you are, the bigger that story needs to be to justify the circumstances you find yourself in. And so it's really hard for people to admit that the ridiculous success that they have may not be a consequence of their own actions or, you know, their own efforts or talents, and mostly as a consequence of circumstances or luck or birth or whatever it is. To be clear, this is true of all people, not just rich people. People always tell stories about themselves in this way, but this whole, hey, we worked hard and deserve it story is very, very, you know, like, that's a very common theme. Yeah, I think you're right, because it's so hard, you know, to stand in the morning and see yourself in the mirror when you're brushing your teeth. And just don't, you don't like to see the truth, you know, you like to make this narrative that, you know, creating something else but the truth, because the truth can be so hard to see, especially if you are very rich and doing nothing. Yeah. While we're talking about Donnie Deutsch, in his words, can we move on a little bit to fucking Denmark? Yeah. And as he referred to your country. Let's talk a little bit there is as a rich person living in fucking Denmark, how high are your fucking taxes? I pay more than 50%. And then from the last of what I'm earning, I can go as high as something like 70%. And what's it like to live in a country like that the taxes you at such a high rate? What do you get in return for it? I get in return, I don't see people sleeping in the streets, like I see in many other countries, and US and New York and Rome and so on. You don't leave anybody behind in Denmark, everybody can make a pretty decent living. And we have security that is extremely important for everybody. And we have a balanced world, you know, where everybody can come to my home. I don't have any locks on my garden, just flowers. Anybody can come just right in. So that kind of thing you can't buy for money. That's some of it. And then of course, everybody can go to schools, healthcare and so on. And that's why we are always among the top 10 and the world and the happiest happiness report come out every year. We always compared with each other, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and the taxes, those countries are the highest in the world. So that is something maybe other countries could look into and say, hey, what is going on in Scandinavia? Right. And let's be clear, these are democracies. If people there were really unhappy paying such high taxes, they'd vote people out and go for lower taxes. But it's not controversial in Denmark, right? I mean, this is the norm and people accept it and embrace it. Yeah, because they can see to get something back of it, you know, they can see there's some public good that they get and they can see, I can see I get high qualified workers for my business. They come, they're healthy, they're clever. And when everything is okay at home, then they can, you know, I can activate them another way than if I was living in Africa in a country, you know, where the health system is another thing and so on. So we get a lot of a lot of things back from our tax money. And nobody is escaping from Scandinavia, because we are paying high taxes. You know, one of the things you've said that I really liked was better to have happy taxpayers than generous philanthropists. I think you're right. But tell us why you think that. It's pretty simple, you know, total philanthropy globally is only about 24, $25 billion is not enough to at all address the global problems. Just to take the gap, the 17 SDG goals, you have a financial gap of $3 trillion. So what can 24 billion do and many of the philanthropy work is mostly going, you know, to the art or sport and so on. Yeah. But we need first of all, to save the 1 million people who are living under $2 per day, the extreme poverty. And another thing, numbers that always pain me so much is that we have 6 million children on the six year that die every year, because of poverty. And that is so extreme, the high number and nobody's talking about it. And you can easily remove that by a simple 1% world sex on the top 1%. So yeah, globally. Yeah, globally. Yeah. Yeah, I'm not sure what your the philanthropy number you used was. But I think you said 27 billion that must be for one for a particular globe, global giving in one dimension, certainly philanthropy is bigger than that. But it does pale in comparison to the problems that we face as a nation, or as a, you know, in the world, and certainly, you know, in the United States, only approximately $50 billion annually is given away for things, philanthropy focused on things associated with poverty. But the $15 minimum wage, for instance, that the delta between what people are paid now or unpaid, then would be you know, in the in the $400 billion a year range. So that the basic point is that as generous as some people may be, or they may appear to be the size of the problems are always so much larger than the scale of philanthropy available to address them that, you know, you just can't get there any other way if you really want if you really want to address these problems. Yeah, exactly. And again, the other thing is that we have to see this globally, because our climate change problems don't know any borders, our huge inequality and extreme poverty don't know any borders, we have Africa very close to Europe. And we don't address those problems, we will have a security problem, we will have people that just will run over. So we have to do something to address that. And that's why I think our 17 STG goals has to be addressed. Now that every country has signed it in 2015, we just have to find the money for it. And actually, at 1% of the top 1% is close in three years to be about 300 trillion. And so 1% is all is 3 trillion, actually is enough. So yeah, if you look at the Swiss report, the total rent on this planet is about 400 trillion. And it's our 1% is closing up to have about 300 of it. So it's, it's just the so big numbers. And it's just not right that big, big money is in the hands of two people. So tell us about the experience of the COVID pandemic on both your thinking and life in Denmark, I mean, certainly here in the United States, it made it ever more obvious how big the gaps are, and how many people are living sort of, you know, hand to mouth, how fragile the economic lives of people are here. But in in Denmark, they're less fragile. So tell us how that evolved your thinking. Yeah, it's less, but the still, I can see the last three and four decades in Denmark or Scandinavia, the welfare system is slowly going down, because you also have the trickle down economic where all the benefits goes to people like us, like me. And the under the pandemic, it has been more clearly now, also in Denmark, that why is that all that money going to the top one or 10 or top 10% and why it's not benefiting everybody. So when I was talking about this issues in 2016, 17, 18, it was really pretty hard to get through this huge noise and through the media. But the end 2020, when the pandemic came, it suddenly, you know, was quite easier to get out there. And when our Prime Minister Denmark just get the questions a few months ago, how much had we used that he said, yeah, we just borrowed $100 billion to address this problem. And the question was, who else going to pay this? And that was all of us, of course. So, you know, we still have the problems and we have a lot of small businesses that is in trouble in Denmark, and not so bad as the US, but the still the most of the money goes to the top also in Denmark, unfortunately. So what do you say to other wealthy people who who say they don't want to be taxed because they would rather choose to give their own money away, they want to decide where it goes? What's your what's your rejoinder to that? We can have a society where the rich people decide who should have the money and who should not have the money and how the side it should run. You have to have the public good, you have to have some kind of welfare system. So I don't believe in philanthropy. I do it and it's beautiful. We should do it. But to solve our common problems, we need systematic change, we need a tax, and we need to address that. Is it the moral right that we have people with that kind of money in their hands today? There's a lot of things to think about, I think, how the system has run the last four decades. How popular is your view among your peers in Denmark? It's certainly got to be more popular than my peers here in the United States. But I just, I wonder. Yeah, but you will be surprised. It actually, I will say, nearly the same or some but, or maybe a little bit bad because the rich people is never saying, hey, our tax is high, why should we pay more? And when I say, listen, the last three, four decades, the taxes has gone down on us, like 20% down minimum. And the total taxes may be something like between 35 to 40% down. I would say it's pretty much the same, actually, it's a really hard job to get them get around this. It's not easy. But unfortunately, when the COVID came last year, it had been a lot of much more easier. When we get our letter out a summer last year, we had globally one more than 200 people signed it. But again, unfortunately, not so many from Scandinavia still, we have a few, but yeah, no good news from here. Sorry to say. We are the same, you know, it's globally much more to say. I calculated earlier that I think we can have something like 5% of the wealthy people with us. But that's also pretty good, if we can get that. Yeah, well, I you know, I don't I wonder, you know, there's no right answer to any of these questions, you know, that it shows you the failure of philanthropy right there, your philanthropy towards getting rich people to support higher taxes. It's been a failure. It's been a failure. It'd be much better if we could just tax them to towards that end. But but but I think our voice is extremely, extremely important. Because when we go out and talk, we really activate the general population in our countries. And when we do that, and we go through the social media and get all that people behind us, they actually go out and go to the right people to go into our parliament. So I think it's extremely important and the media love the rich people to talk about this. And that's why Media and the Humanity Network that we started last year, is getting so well off because we're getting members every week. And people just love it, you know. So I think a few from 5% of the top there is people going out and saying what we are saying really can activate millions of people below who can go actually and work the right people inside our government. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you class traders make a great story. Yeah, I love it. I love it. Yeah. And I can tell you, not not being one of the really rich people in this conversation, how incredibly useful it is to have people like you and Nick out there making this argument, because you're taken seriously in a way that somebody like me just would not be. You're totally right. Because as I said before to Nick, he really inspired me when I saw him first time five years ago and what he was doing. So he's definitely one of those with inspired me to do what I'm doing. And I just from 2015 16 being 100% only doing this and not out and make normal business and the money because I can't do that anymore because I have to do something for my children also and the next generation. Oh, so did you sort of retire from your business work, your business stuff? I work 90% in the foundation and 10% with my people about the normal business. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Me too. More or less. But the interesting thing is that the business is going better than before. No, because it needs something incredible how people are taking against this. Everything we do 90% go to the foundation to do good industry poverty and so on and so on. So it's like people coming all together and working harder and just get sense of all of it to do the right thing, you know, and to just help your next. That's really interesting. That's good. Good for you. So did you have to ask, did you grow up in a civic family? I mean, was public service and these sorts of things a part of how you were raised? Yeah, I was raised by my mother and I was with my three brothers and one sister at Copenhagen. We just go to public school, just totally normal living. So yeah, because we have the right, what you say, the same opportunities that every kid in Denmark go to the school and university and everything, because all of it was free and the state helped my mother to get a job and so on. But I mean, did you start doing this sort of political activism as a younger person or is this relatively new for you? I will say that I got inspired by Shekawara and at a young age. I hadn't printed on my bag actually. So I always fight for justice and poverty. My belief is that the people are beautiful, all of them, doesn't matter where they are living. But there's some of the systems that we have today has to be changed to serve the common good and leave no one behind and so on. Yeah, no, for sure. What are the focuses of your foundation other than this? What else are you working on? The focus is if you have two pillars in our foundation when you started, one is we make normal philanthropic work, we make schools, often large health and subconscious in Africa and so on. But our main project is our move humanity that going out to say 1% wealth tax on the rich. And to support that we started Miners for Humanity last year to advocate for 1% wealth tax. Do we want to get to the final question, Nick? Absolutely. Go for it, Cody. Okay. We ask this of all of our guests. Why do you do this work? I do this first because this is the right thing to do. The second is the society, the generations that have built the system, it's normal for me to give back at least a system that is not first than when I got it. And then I have two children, and my daughter also gave me two grandchildren. So I have to look them in the eye and say, I try to do the best I could and leave something behind that was maybe not better. It's too late. We have done two bad things the last four decades, but we can try to fix it. And I think it's possible because we have all the means and we have the technology for it. We just need the human will to come together. So, and the last thing is, I always get the more happier by giving, you know, and not only checking. And that helped make me happier, my family happier, my children happier. And since when we got all in from 2015, I would say myself and my men, my family had never been happier than we are today. So that is one of the things I want to give to rich people to say, come on, go out and try it. You have nothing to lose, but extremely much to gain. And happiness is one thing every person has planted it running for every day. So there is one way to do it just by giving and do it good. I love that. I love that. Well, Jeff, our thank you so much for being with us today. And thanks for your incredible work and leadership on these issues. I know it can be lonely. Yeah, exactly. But I'm very happy to be here and very grateful that I got in touch with you. And yeah, let's see what we can do together in the future. I love it. I have to say, I've been to Denmark and it is a beautiful country and there are no people on the streets. It was no, it's fantastic, you know, living on the streets. I just say there's lots of people on the streets. It's a beautiful country. And when I was in my 20s, I went and did the backpacking through Europe thing and spent about a week with a family in Central Denmark. And, you know, he was an engineer, not rich like you, but, you know, professional class, kind of like the way, you know, I was raised, my father was a doctor. And, you know, they had a modest but well appointed house. And I asked them at the time, you know, what they paid and they paid like 60, 70% in taxes and we're perfectly happy with it. You know, it was a well-ordered country. The infrastructure was great. Everybody had healthcare taken care of. Their kids had a couple of kids around my age, gone to college for free. And when they graduated college, if they wanted to be an artist, they could get a little subsidy for an apartment and there'd be jobs for them. Right. And there wasn't the type of insecurity and stress that goes along with being an American. For sure. And, you know, the truth is that we're probably not going to end up in a country as egalitarian as Denmark. But the truth is, Goldie, you don't have to have tax rates at 60 or 70%. You know, if we raised taxes on all income to 45% and reinstated some reasonable corporate tax rates and closed all the international loopholes and did a bunch of stuff around wages, right, raise the minimum wage and, you know, impose a reasonable overtime threshold, two or three other things, 90% of these problems would melt away. We don't have to go all the way to Denmark to create an economic system that is radically more inclusive than the one that we have today. And it would not include a huge amount of trade off for the wealthiest citizens or the biggest corporations. Just wait. And I also want to add a little support for higher taxes from somebody who's not a member of the super rich. And you know, Nick, that before I went to work for you, I'd spent the previous decade as a blogger and activist and all weekly journalist, and I did not make a lot of money. And it was a struggle. And you pay me much more generously than blogging for free did or working at a newspaper did. And I got to tell you, it is so much better to pay taxes than not to pay taxes. It is great. I mean, the fact that I pay substantially more taxes than I did seven years ago, oh my God, my life is so much better because it means I'm making more money. Yeah, no, it's all good. So thank you, Nick, for making me pay more taxes. There we go. Well, it has made my life a lot more secure and less stressful than it was before. So Nick, count me as one of far as happy taxpayers. There you go. Me too. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next.