 Real quick, we wanted to tell you about another podcast called Economics Detective Radio. On it, you'll find answers to questions you didn't know you had, like what can the Volkswagen Emissions Scandal tell us about car exhaust and public health? What's the relationship between maritime trade policy and the Merchant Marine? And what can a 1920 border closure tell us about immigration and the economy? Find out more on Economics Detective Radio, available now wherever you listen to podcasts. We absolutely have to find a way in this country to totally transform our healthcare system into something that works for all citizens. And in a post-COVID world where anybody with COVID, anybody is potentially denied a claim based on a pre-existing condition. There is just a huge political fight ahead of us. I mean, these may be the most important 40 days for the future of our democracy that we might have ever had. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. It's like Econ 101 without all the BS. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. Since the onset of the COVID-19 shock to the economy, roughly 6.2 million workers have lost access to health insurance that they previously got through their employer. According to the best measure of net employment change, which is just staggering, right? Yeah. And it's nuts. It's crazy. It's not a way to run an economy. It's not a way to run a healthcare system. It dwarfs the lost coverage that we experienced during the biggest job losing period of the Great Recession. And we absolutely have to find a way in this country to totally transform our healthcare system into something that works for all citizens and in the context of the broader economy and at all times. And the pandemic has proved, I think, beyond a shadow of a doubt, how idiotic an employer based healthcare system is, right? Because in a circumstance where millions of people are losing their jobs and thus their healthcare, during a healthcare crisis, right? Because of a healthcare crisis, that's a great way to prove to yourself that having an employer based healthcare system is idiotic and counterproductive. Today, we get to talk to this fantastic guy, Abdul El-Sayed, who's a physician and epidemiologist, a public health expert, a really interesting character. My name is Dr. Abdul El-Sayed. I am a physician, epidemiologist, and progressive activist. And just wrote a book called Healing Politics, a Doctor's Journey into the Heart of our Political Epidemic. And early next year in February, I've got another one coming out with my co-author, Dr. Micah Johnson, Medicare for All, a Citizens Guide. Hope folks will check them out. With a Supreme Court nomination battle heading our way, it looks like Republicans are planning on confirming a new justice just before they hear a contest against the Affordable Care Act. If you could just start off at least talking about what's at stake here if they were to throw out Obamacare and protections against preexisting conditions and all that. Yeah, well, basic healthcare access for 20 million Americans, the ability for health insurance corporations to discriminate against people with preexisting conditions and basically deny them healthcare coverage because they are sick, and the healthcare economy as we know it. I think, you know, in so many ways, this is a moment that speaks to the worst in the way that our system is so fragile and leaves people so insecure. And there is just a huge political fight ahead of us. I mean, these may be the most important 40 days for the future of our democracy that we might have ever had, certainly in times of relative peace. And so it really is a scary time. You know, as a former health director, I'm often reminded that numbers don't do as good a job in explaining what's at stake as the stories of people's lives. And we have to remember when we talk about that big number, 20 million, every one of those people is somebody with a particular set of precarious circumstances who has, you know, joys and fears and people who love them and people they love. And we can't forget that those are 20 million different stories of folks who could very well be failed by our government right now. And in a post COVID world where anybody with COVID, anybody is potentially denied a claim based on a pre-existing condition? That's right. You know, we don't know what the long-term consequences of COVID-19 are going to be. This disease has only really been in humans now for about nine months, and we don't know what the implications are. And so you can imagine a moment where even people who had asymptomatic COVID-19 are experiencing complications of that infection three, 10, 20 years on. And in a world where we have private health insurance corporations who then are allowed to discriminate against them, you could imagine a circumstance where a large swath of Americans are barred from being able to get health care because of the consequences of the same party that barred them from having health care failing to take on this COVID-19 pandemic. So on one side of their mouths, they're talking about herd immunity, this extremely wayward, scientifically unsubstantiated approach to taking on this disease. And on the other side of their mouth, they're talking about taking away people's health care in the context of the pandemic that they are actively facilitating because of their choices. It is absurd, and it's just so cynical about feeding the interests of those who have money at the costs of those who don't. So your book starts with this really interesting quote, medicine is a social science and politics is nothing else but medicine on a large scale. So explain that, translate it into at least pandemic terms. Yeah, well, it's easy to look at medicine, especially nowadays, given how much science has given us as a sterile scientific endeavor. But let's not forget that we're talking about healing people. And that has deep social implications. And frankly, even to practice medicine well is not enough just to understand the science of why people get sick. One also has to understand the social science of why people get sick. After all, this pandemic has taught us anything is that, you know, it's not just about the pathophysiology of this virus underneath our skin. It is also about the pathophysiology of our society in ways that happen above our skin, right? Who gets access to a good job that pays a living wage? Who gets access to health care? Who's allowed to stay home and work from behind a computer screen? Who has to go to work in the midst of a global pandemic? These are questions of social pathology, not of simply biological pathology. And if we're serious about healing, then we have to take on the social dimensions. It's a quote from Rudolf Verkow, who operated on both fronts. He, frankly, is the father of modern pathology, the mapping of biological failure to the symptoms that we see when people get sick. But also he was a leader in the Liberal Party in Austria, actually faced off against Audubon Bismarck multiple times as Bismarck wanted to enact policies that benefited, you know, the ruling class. Verkow was always there in opposition. It's actually a really fun story I shared in the book about a duel that Bismarck challenged Verkow to. And Verkow said, you know, I don't duel, but I'll challenge you to a sausage duel, which meant they'd have two sausages. One of them would be loaded with roundworm larva, and whoever ate the poisoned one would end up getting sick. And Bismarck was like, yeah, that's too far for me, bro. And so he backed off. But, you know, this is someone who recognized that it's not just about the science, it's also about the social science and about recognizing the social dimensions and the political dimensions of how people get sick and why they get sick in societies. So you're part of the Biden-Sanders unity task force on the future of healthcare. Tell us about, you know, the glorious future. Should Biden get elected? Well, you know, I'll tell you, I could have told you a lot more, of course, before the passing of the late great Justice Ginsburg, because, you know, right now the future of the ACA itself hangs in the balance. Then, of course, if the ACA is deemed unconstitutional, it's going to mean that we're not only going to have to claw back what might have been lost, but also to think differently. And so it really may change the approach that a future Biden administration could take to healthcare. But, you know, assuming that the ACA stays in place, which I think is a very tenuous assumption, the plan was to create a far more muscular version of a public option than the vice president initially ran on in the primary. Now, to be clear, I support Medicare for all. It's one of the reasons I got into politics and it's the reason I, you know, co-wrote a book about it. But recognizing that Bernie Sanders did not win the primary, the question that I had, as well as my colleagues who were Sanders appointees, including Representative Jay Appal, Pramila Jay Appal of Washington, who is the lead sponsor of the Medicare for all bill in the house, as well as Don Burwick, a former centers for Medicare and Medicaid services administrator. Our goal was to ask, how do we build the case for stronger public health care? How do we provide health care for folks who right now cannot afford it? And how do we take on the power of corporations that have dominated it? And a lot of the recommendations that we were able to come together with representatives on the other side, folks who were really leading the fight for Joe Biden's health care plan and ask, how do we do this thing together? Even if we may disagree on the central premise of what we ought to do. And what we were able to come together on is a public option. That's a lot more muscular. It's fully funded and subsidized for folks earning less than $52,000 a year for a family of four, 200% of poverty. It is a deductible free. It was deductible free. It would be truly a public option, meaning corporations could decide to, rather than buying private health insurance for their employees, enroll them on the public option. And I think probably most critically, it would allow CMS Medicare to negotiate the price of prescription drugs on behalf of every single American, which of course is illegal right now because of pharma lobbying. And so these are really important investments in public health care that really would provide health care to a lot of folks who don't have it. But at the same time, to me, you look at the issues that we have in our health care system and I don't see how Medicare for All is not the most elegant, most simple, most politically palatable approach to solving them all. And we may maintain disagreements on that front, but I think it's really important right now to recognize what the alternative is, which is Donald Trump. And he has no health care plan, despite the fact that he keeps dangling one from a string. He has not intended to have a health care plan. He simply wants to undo what his predecessor did. And in so many ways, this very cynical approach to appointing a Supreme Court justice to replace one of the lionesses of justice in our society, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, is a ploy to just undo what Obama did without any real investment in even thought into how to take on this very naughty and complex problem. I'm going to uncharacteristically strike an optimistic note and wonder if, ironically, if they strike down the ACA, does that leave Medicare for All as the only constitutional option? Unless they also strike down Medicare, which I wouldn't put it beyond them. But if Medicare is constitutional, certainly Medicare for All is, you're just expanding it to everybody. Well, it's a very simple solution. You're basically taxing people and then providing a good, which is, if you struck that down, basically, you'd say government can't exist anymore because that's what government does. Well, they're going there. They're trying. They certainly are trying. And what I will say is, though, is that if we lose the Supreme Court battle, I worry a lot not just about the ACA, but about Roe v. Wade, for example, which is critical to providing health care for people with uteruses. And you think about all of the other laws and policies that have tried in this country to promote more justice and more equity and more sustainability. I worry a lot about their future. And so this is a fight that I think starts with health care, but could go a long, long way beyond it. And there's a lot we need to be fighting for. I've been thinking hard about health care for a long time. And in my role as a technology entrepreneur, tried to build essentially an alternative pathway for providing people health care some time ago. It failed for a variety of reasons, most notably because the insurance industrial complex hated it. But it definitely taught me that progressives are great at talking about providing health care for everyone without providing a plausible either a plan or a narrative that explains to people how we're going to do that in a more affordable way. Because the health care problem in America is twofold. The first is not everybody has it, but the fundamental problem is that it costs roughly twice as much per person per year to do health care in the United States as it does in every other industrialized nation. And that is the fundamental problem, is the economic arrangements that are in place that lead a colonoscopy to cost $500 in Germany and $5,000 in the United States. This is the problem. You're spot on. Right. And by the way, I don't mean the price you're charged, I mean the fundamental cost of the operation. Right. And I certainly haven't heard anything about what we do to rearrange the economic feedback loops in the health care system to bring the cost of doing things down enough so that we can quite easily afford to provide everybody with health care. Right. So I guess to sum up that question, apart from negotiating drug prices, would a robust public option dramatically bring down costs? Well, I think that the challenge that those of us who support Medicare for all have is exactly this one is how do you address not just the high cost, but the system that created the high cost. And the reason why Medicare for all is so effective to doing that is because it creates a government monopsony. Right. A lot of folks know what a monopoly is. It's a single seller of a good. A monopsony is a single buyer of a good. And both a monopsony like a monopoly has the power to set a price. And if the government is setting the price for health care, it eliminates this adverse feedback loop whereby both the insurance corporations and the health care provider corporations have more incentive to negotiate using each other against their competitors than they do to negotiate on behalf of the ostensible customer. And that leaves us in the system more like a product than a customer. And Medicare for all solves that by basically eliminating all of the insurance side of it and setting a singular price, which also eliminates a lot of the overhead that inflates price in the United States as well. You know, there are ways to get through there, which we talk about in the plan. And I know that the Biden team is interested in engaging with, which is price setting. Right. If you know that one of the reasons that the costs continue to go up in the system is because the prices can go up. One of the ways to do that is just for the government to set the price, to say basically this is the price of an MRI. And no matter what the provider is or who the insurer is, that you set that price. That being said, it's a lot more elegant to do under Medicare for all because you do it naturally by leveraging market laws. But doing that by basically making one buyer of health care, which is the government. So there's a way to do it. It's just a lot more complex and it's hard to explain. And this is the bigger picture here of health care is that it is so complex to explain to folks because most folks don't I mean, I'm a doctor. My wife's a doctor. And, you know, when it comes time for us to buy our insurance through her employer, half the time have to sit down and actually negotiate, you know, leveraging an actuarial table, what we think is the best rate. Right. And this is as a physician epidemiologist. And so if it's opaque to me, I can't imagine how opaque it is to the average user. And so we've just got to do a lot better about being simple about it. And one of the things that Medicare for all does, which is so important, is to simplify the process for people. If the only insurer in town is Medicare, it changes the conversation. Now, a lot of doctors would say, well, I wouldn't be able to exist if all I was able to build was Medicare, blah, blah, blah. And the problem with that argument is that underlying it is a certain lack of imagination. Right. You could change the reimbursement rates as you needed to make sure that doctors are made whole. There's a second order piece here if we want to get really into the weeds that I also think is really important. One of the things that we've seen across the health care industry right now is deep consolidation both on the insurance side and on the provider side, and particularly on the provider side, as the larger providers have been able to negotiate better rates per unit care, they've been able, in effect, to outcompete the individual doctor who's got their shingle out. And so it's forcing those doctors to, in effect, rather than being owners of their own business, to become simply employees of a much larger corporation. And what that means is that their share of the earnings of their own work falls. And under Medicare for All, because there's one rate, now, if you're a small private practice or you're a large system, you're still getting the same reimbursement per unit care, which means that if you're good at what you do and you're efficient and you're effective, you can grow and you can have your own business too. And so I actually think it's in doctors' best interests to be able to work in a system where they don't have to worry about the large health system swallowing up their practice because they just can't compete. I hadn't thought about that before, that it actually recreates an environment where doctors can choose to be entrepreneurial if that's what they want instead of employees. That's exactly right. Yeah. One of the questions we love to ask is the benevolent dictator question, which is if you were in charge of America's healthcare system, politics aside, what are the top three things you would do? How should we reconstitute this giant mess? Yeah, fix this for us. I would rapidly and very quickly establish a democracy, clearly. But then I would look, I think the big three for me are, number one, we would pass Medicare for All, because I think it addresses so many of the inefficiencies in the healthcare system as it stands. It provides every single person healthcare and it reduces the overall cost and also the increasing rate of cost in our society. That's number one. Number two, though, I would massively invest in public health. In fact, I would put Medicare for All under the public health infrastructure in this country because the best single thing we can do is prevent someone from getting sick in the first place. We spend so little on public health in our society and it shows. We're in the midst of a global pandemic and our public health apparatus was caught flat-footed in large part because we have a president who's an incompetent buffoon, but also because the institutions themselves aren't geared to take the reins when they need to. Then the third thing I would do is I would really seek to reintegrate aspects of healthcare that I think we have wrongly cut away from the healthcare conversation. Things like dental coverage and mental health coverage and long-term services and support coverage, because those are critical public health and healthcare services that ought to be negotiated in the same package of goods. The notion that we, in the conversation, cut the head off. No mental healthcare, no dental healthcare, no- What's the history of that? That's crazy. How did that happen? It is because we traditionally, dentistry was practiced as its own thing versus medicine. That's just an accident of history. Also, because the way that healthcare developed was in reference to infectious diseases. We stepped way back before we even had the germ theory of disease. The goal was to save lives and the thing that killed most people was infectious diseases. So much of the advent of medicine was built around protecting people from infectious diseases rather than investing in the long-term functionality of a body. Because we just wanted to save your life at that point. Now we've come to a point where even chronic diseases are really about long-term care management rather than life-saving care in one point. Frankly, I would argue that the hospital itself as an institution is a bit of an anachronism. We still have hospital-based care because we originated hospitals in a time when treatment was you came in very sick, we treated you, and then you left as healthy as you were when you came in. Now, you're talking about the long-term management of chronic diseases. So everything's about managing people's functional abilities. We've had this convergent evolution and we look at these systems and say, well, why don't we invest in making sure that people can see and people can hear and people's teeth are healthy and people are feeling good and are well situated and functional in their lives through mental health supports in the same system that we care for their liver and manage their diabetes and make sure that they don't have heart disease. It doesn't make any sense, but in part it's a function of the evolution of healthcare over time. Yeah, crazy. I'm sorry, I took you on a tangent. Did you have a third thing you would do as the benevolent dictator? Yeah, my third after, of course, establishing democracy was to reintegrate mental healthcare, dental healthcare, vision and hearing support and oral healthcare into the system. Okay, well, I'd vote for you for benevolent dictator. Me too. Especially the restore democracy part. That's always important that we had with that. I'm imagining this severe tautology here where I reestablished democracy and then you're like, no, be the dictator. I'm like, no, back to democracy. And then we're just bouncing back and forth. I mean, like, no you, sir. No you, sir. Yeah. Well, here's hoping, speaking of democracy, here's hoping you have a chance to help the Biden administration fix these problems. Well, I appreciate that. There's a lot of problems to fix. And as an epidemiologist and former health commissioner, I have felt a little bit like a general who trained for the big war and now I'm somewhat missing it. And I really, I watch what's happening right now and I feel like there is so much we need to do to get it right and it'd be a privilege to be a part of that. Well, thanks so much for being with us. It was a fantastic conversation. Yeah, thanks. It was my privilege and any opportunity to get to walk out about healthcare, I never miss it. So thank you. So Nick, on the one hand, talking with Abdul makes me feel really confident that there are competent people working with what we hope will be an incoming Biden administration to get a handle on this crisis. At the same time, oh my God, what happens if, I won't say if Biden doesn't win if he's not allowed to take office. Always the rave sunshine. You know, Goldie, I mean, when you said that you had a glimmer of optimism, you know, I'd never quite thought of it that way. But if these clowns do eliminate the Affordable Care Act, it may be the world's best forcing function to get it right. It may be the world's best opportunity to provide essentially Medicare for all or Medicare for everyone who wants it. Because in the absence of an alternative, the Republican Congress is going to be looking down the barrel of, you know, 20 to 40 million incredibly pissed off people and all the people who know those people. And potentially no other constitutional option. If they close the door to an Affordable Care Act style system, then, you know, government health insurance may be the only thing that's available to the federal government to address this. Correct. So, you know, unintended consequences can always happen. And it's, I wanted to bring back, we're talking about this within a COVID context. And I wanted to get to some of both the economic issues here, Nick, and of course, the racial and gender issues. I mean, even the CDC has acknowledged that COVID has disproportionately impacted people of color, both in terms of higher infection rates and in higher mortality rates. I mean, these are people who are disproportionately low wage workers and therefore ironically essential workers, but also people who economically could not afford to stay home. They didn't have that option. If their job was still there, they had to take it and they had to go to work and put themselves and their families at risk. Yeah. But it's not just COVID. A couple of weeks ago, you and David Rolf published your piece in Time magazine about the $50 trillion trans upward redistribution of income from the bottom 90% to the top 1%. And you write about how both in terms of COVID and an income in general, it disproportionately impacts women and people of color. And I want to bring this point up because I've been doing some research on my own and it should not be surprising to anybody that when you track health outcomes, when you look at the number one outcome is longevity, what's the best predictor of life expectancy? Wealth, the higher your income, the longer you live. The lower your income, the sooner you die. Across the board, so anybody who tells us, oh, stop complaining about the American healthcare system. It's the best in the world. And oh, sure, it's more expensive than everybody else's, but it's providing the highest quality healthcare in the world. Yeah, for you, Nick, for people like you and for people like me, but for the vast majority of Americans, no. The lower your income, the poorer your health, the shorter your lifespan. And that is, it's just totally immoral. Yeah. It is heartening to hear from people like Abdul, who I think clearly understand these problems super well. And in about, what is it, 45 days, we're going to find out if people like that are going to be in charge or not. On the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, it's another Ask Me Anything, where Nick and I will be answering your questions. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.