 We've talked about wealth inequality in all sorts of ways. The 99% versus the 1% is one, but the facts around the 9.9% versus everybody else is actually pretty interesting. Just statistically, $1.2 million in net worth gets you into the 9.9%. Inequality of a certain type, inequality that essentially comes from a certain profound unfairness has profound consequences throughout society. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. So Nick, it's the holiday season and we have a gift for you. Normally on this podcast, we berate you and your cohort of 0.1%ers about how you're destroying our economy and our democracy and you're the source of all the inequality. But on this episode, you get to berate me and my cohort of 9.9%ers. That's right. We get to revisit with our old friend, Matthew Stewart, who has a new book out called, The 9.9%, The New Aristocracy That is Entrenching Inequality and Warping Our Culture. And this book obviously is an elaboration on a piece that Matthew wrote a few years ago in the Atlantic on the 9.9%. And I love this book and this argument because I do think that he very sensibly identifies, I think a new and sort of more fulsome way to talk about inequality, which is not just concentrated at the top 0.1%, which in many arithmetic ways it is, but the cultural implications of having an economy where basically the top 10% of Americans have shared all of the economic growth over the last 40 or 50 years and has essentially become a culture in and of itself. It's like this society within a society of people competing to maintain their place in that segment of society. And I think the cool thing about the book is it both, and this argument is it both elaborates how this segment of society is harming the rest of society, but also how it harms itself, right? If you're part of this society, there are all sorts of crazy behaviors that we have created and are perpetuating and are sort of letting infect the rest of the society from the crazy ways in which we deal with kids sports today to this nutty obsession with getting your kids into the only the best colleges and so on and so forth. It's just, it's really, really, I think pathological and destructive. And the book both points it out and points out our culpability. Right, and I can tell you as somebody who's at the bottom of the 9.9% near the bottom, which by the way, so you know, it's just statistically, $1.2 million in net worth gets you into the 9.9%. And I get there by virtue of having owned the house in Seattle for 24 years. So with this crazy housing market, which is another product of the 9.9%, and yet having being in the 9.9%, it's incredibly stressful, this fear of falling out and this fear that my daughter won't be able to climb into it. Absolutely, and you know, as you know, it creates a lot of really, really crazy behaviors. And it's just, you know, it's just so different from how I grew up where the stakes just were much lower. You know, we've talked about wealth inequality in all sorts of ways, the 99% versus the 1% is one, but the facts around the 9.9% versus everybody else is actually pretty interesting, if you understand the statistics. Since 1963, the bottom 90% have seen their share of wealth decline. Today, they have only 10% of the nation's financial wealth, while the 9.9% controls about half of the personal wealth in the nation. As I mentioned, to get into the 9.9%, you need $1.2 million in net worth. The median is 2.4 million, and it's not until you have over $10 million in wealth that you get into the top 1%. Anyway, Nick, I got to tell you, I saw a lot of myself in this book throughout and not always comfortably. So I'm really looking forward to talking to Matthew about the book. So my name is Matthew Stewart, and I call myself a writer. And I have published a number of books, people I think tend to think that they're on disparate topics. I see them as all united. The most recent one is the 9.9%, and it takes a look at how inequality affects the way we think and act and how it's dividing our country up. But it follows on other books about American history and also the history of philosophy. So who the hell is this 9.9% that you speak of? So there's a math part, but since you guys are good at math, I'm gonna over it really quickly. So we all know that there's been this massive concentration or increase in inequality, but it turns out that all of the relative increases actually occurred in a much smaller sliver than we usually think. It's not the top 1%, but it's the top 0.1%. That's got essentially all of the relative increase in concentration of wealth. And it turns out that not all of the bottom lost out over that 50 years. In fact, it's the bottom 90%. So in between, if you do math, you get this 9.9% of the wealth distribution, income distribution looks roughly the same. And it turns out that this is actually the wealthiest group as a whole in American society. So 50 years ago, if let's say the rich 0.1% had a dollar, the bottom 90% would have had about $4. Now it's 50-50, so they each get a dollar, but all along the 9.9% is held on to $2.50. Just basically held onto its relative share. So that's the math, but of course people bounce around in these percentiles. And it's really more, I like to think of it more as a landscape, or what we see when we look at the economy, that there's basically this Shangri-La in the American economy of getting into 9.9%. And that's changed. So the last little bit of the math I think is relevant is that the ratio between the wealth of the 9.9% and the 90%, that's sort of the best way of visualizing the hill of the American dream. That's now about two and a half times what it was 50 years ago. So simple way of putting that is the American dream is about two and a half times as hard for most people. That's the 9.9%, but it's meant to open up discussion, not to close it. Great. So obviously you didn't write the book as a math exercise. You're making a more generalized claim about the effect this math has on American society. So unpack your basic thesis. My basic thesis is that inequality of a certain type, I don't mean just the mere fact people have different amounts of resources in their command, but inequality that essentially comes from a certain profound unfairness has profound consequences throughout society. And what it does above all is it makes it impossible for people to form a reasonable society, makes them individually unreasonable and it makes their society unreasonable. And we're seeing that in our society now. We're seeing how this big tide of inequality is shaping the way individuals behave in unreasonable ways. And it's also shaping our political system in ways that make it profoundly unreasonable. And so that's a very abstract take, but I also think it comes down to like very, straightforward things in terms of how we raise kids and how we go out and go on the marriage market and how we think about education and so on. And this is a direct line from some of your previous books in that you make the point that our democracy was grounded in reason. Yeah, well, thanks for pointing out the goal to the connection with the earlier stuff, because I do think that there's a strong connection and it works at two levels. One is that I think that if you interpret American history correctly, you'll actually see that an unexpected equality was really important in powering the America's revolutionary moments. So while when we look back now on the revolutionary period, we tend to think of it as a very unequal period with a few people in breaches and wigs and lots of slaveholders running around. In fact, the American colonies were much more egalitarian than the old European world that they came from. And that was a really important precondition for the revolution. And the other part is what you mentioned Goldie, which is of course the tradition of emphasizing reason and basically seeing coming to the conviction that we can form a society that's committed not to a particular set of dogmas, but to a process of uncovering useful truths and governing ourselves. So that I think was the essence of the American Revolution. And that's what I think we're losing as we go through this massive growth of inequality in recent years. Well, can you unpack some more what you mean by the ways in which this inequality makes people unreasonable? Like in the subtitle it is, entrenching inequality and warping our culture. So continue to unpack that. Yeah, so I'm really interested in what happens in intellectual culture, I guess, because I'm sort of academic Monquet or something, but academic life is always at some risk of being irrelevant. But when you see how it behaves under periods of rising inequality, I think you see a growth in that inequality. And in my book, I had a chapter, where I had some fun with Amy Chua, the tiger mom, right, of Yale. So she teaches at Yale Law School, and she is very much associated with the meritocratic values of this upper middle class, wrote a whole book about how you should torture your kids to make sure that they get into selective colleges and so on. But what you see in her intellectual and political work is that not withstanding the fact that she can probably see what some of our big issues are. She's so determined to hold on to her position, so determined to get her kids ahead, that for example, she overlooks the fact that a Supreme Court justice nominee has a pattern of sexual harassment that she herself had warned her students about it, because it turns out that he's a member of the club, and he also is employing her daughter. And so she wants to kind of stay in good with her profession. And I think that that's a small story, but it reflects the way in which under rising inequality as the stakes go higher, as it becomes harder and harder to stay on the right side of the fence, people essentially absorb all these crazy value systems, and they're prone to essentially putting out pseudo-intellectual stuff like Amy Chua, I think, is doing in order to disguise, not very well, a transparent career interest. So that's like one small example, but there are plenty others. There's a whole family of the child growing thing. I think that's got a lot of sociological evidence behind it. There's the neighborhood stuff and so on. Right, and by the neighborhood stuff, you're talking about how homeownership, and I live in Seattle where our houses are wildly overpriced, and my very liberal neighbors are just so fearful of losing value in their properties because they're relying on it to maintain themselves in the 9.9%, and it warps the decisions we make in terms of all the nimbyism we see. Yeah, I mean, and I feel the pain. I mean, we just moved out of Brooklyn, which is, of course, the heartland of the 9.9%, and I don't fault people for individually feeling that pressure. Of course, we can all look at the numbers. We all know that those houses and their value is central to our individual economic fortunes, but come on, if we step back, it's pretty obvious that this is a totally dysfunctional way of organizing housing and also organizing wealth distribution. I mean, the two striking facts about, well, there are more than two striking facts, but a number of striking facts about the American housing situation are that we have this housing affordability crisis where 74% of metropolitan areas, the average wage is not enough to pay for the average rent or to buy the average home. And obviously, the only way that that can be squared is that you essentially have to inherit or find some lucky break or get the parents to contribute. And the other crucial fact is that we see that in those areas that are most desirable, you actually have a decrease of population in many cases, we certainly aren't building enough houses. And the obvious explanation for that is that all the nimbyism is freezing up. It's people gaining control over their local systems. This is something that upper middle class people are very good at doing. They gain control in order to maximize their value. They rapidly build walls and prevent anybody else from coming in. And that leads to huge systemic problems. And then the other huge thing about our neighborhoods that has to go as we said, is that we still have a pretty amazing residential segregation. I mean, there's some indications that it's easing in some areas, but it's not. It's pretty astonishing, especially when you go to other countries and you come to the US and you just see how color-curved everything is. Right. So as you point out, my neighbors and I, we're not innocent bystanders. We are sustaining and perpetuating this system. Yeah. I think that's a big part of it. When you look at the numbers of, where does the wealth of the 9.9% come from? Real estate, inherited real estate, that's a huge part of the picture. And some of that's dumb luck, but some of it is essentially people gaining a kind of monopoly on space. And then the other thing that for me is kind of a tragedy when you look at it in historical perspective is what I think of as the Henry George angle on this. In an earlier time, and I'm not that much earlier, I'm talking about the middle of the 20th century, housing kind of worked the other way. It was actually a kind of a welfare system that ended up subsidized in the middle class. And some of that was unintentional. Some of it was intentional. The intentional parts were things like mortgage finance systems and mortgage tax relief. And the unintentional things were the compression of home values as the values at the top came down, the values of middle class homes in relative terms increased. And so it worked as a kind of welfare system for the middle class, but I think people have lost sight of the fact that now it's a welfare system for the top decile of our economy and everybody else has to ultimately pay the price for that. And of course that also feeds into the segregation issue because it turns out that blacks for historical reasons, often because they haven't got the house to inherit our renters to a much greater degree. And so they haven't been able to participate in this kind of weird system where we all throw the money into the pool and the biggest pieces go out to people with the biggest homes. Matthew, can you unpack a little more how concentrating basically all of the benefits of economic growth in the top 10%, it is warping our culture. Can you give us some more examples? Yeah, so one thing that got me into this was just looking at the parenting issues. I'm using culture very broadly and it includes sort of social cultural things. And if you've been in the game, a parenting thing, you see it's kind of nutty. I mean, it's completely insane. Yeah, what people were doing. And I'm guilty to some degree, we're trying to protect our thoughts from any possible harm. We're also sculpting them right from the beginning with those precious experiences that are gonna make them ensure their success within this 9.9%. There's a good amount of sociology that looks at this and can kind of quantify it. And it can show that yes, American parenting is at one extreme. And when you compare it with other countries, what you find is that this American style of parenting, the hyper parenting, the Supreme parenting, when you compare across countries, what you find is that it's associated with inequality. So the bigger the gap between the rich and the poor in any given country, the more likely you're gonna have parents. And I don't mean just the rich parents, I mean all parents competing madly to try to make sure that their kids have some chance. And as we all know, it's not great for the kids. Yeah, I mean, just to expand on that, I think that in a world where, if I compare the world my kids live in today with the world that I grew up in, the difference between doing super well and doing moderately well, we're not vast, right? You lived in the same kinds of homes and you lived in the same kinds of neighborhoods. And you drove slightly different cars, but your kids went to roughly the same schools and had roughly the same chance. But today it's this crazy winner take all mentality where basically the only possibility of living the good life is to become a bond trader for Goldman Sachs, right? Or some such. And that creates this crazy pathology in parenting where everything is high stakes, where at five years old, your children have to decide what select sports team they're gonna get on, right? I mean, when I grew up, kids played all the sports, right? And fall, you played soccer and then it's spring, you play football or basketball or whatever it was. And then you ran track and it was all for fun and to be in shape. And today it's this high stakes game that costs $5,000 per kid per year in the hopes that they will be able to get a scholarship to a college or something like that. Yeah, that's right. And something else you said that really resonates with me is that at the end of the day, the great prize is that you become a banker for Goldman Sachs. Yeah. And so then that leads to this further complication where you invested so much, not just money, but psychologically all your identity into this project. And at the end of the day, you're writing PowerPoint presentations until midnight kind of thing, which is what most people actually do. And that leads to a big existential quandary for the people who end up there. And then of course, for the many people who don't, and there's this sense that somehow they failed, even though they simply failed to make it into that tiny sliver at the top. Yeah, and the toll this is taking on kids today is really, really obvious with all the depression and anxiety and angst and combined that with social media and all that stuff, it's not great. I think that's an important point you make in the book because essentially the 9.9% are not only complicit in this regime of inequality, we're also kind of victims of it, both in the way it warps our own lives, but also the sense of precarity that it instills in us, this fear of falling out of the 9.9%, ourselves or our children. Yeah, no, I wanted to bring out both of those sides, right? That on the one hand, there's this obliviousness that comes from being on the winning side that essentially you are making, so you think that the system works and it's just a matter of doing the right thing and aren't those people idiots for not doing it? But on the other hand, we all kind of get that actually, luck had a much bigger role than we thought, that so many things can go wrong. One little misstep, I mean, your kid gets mono at the wrong time, they failed their AP exams and there's no college or no good college for them to go to and it's all over, it's Starbucks or the rest of their life. So yeah, there's a kind of precarity that extends throughout the society when you get this sort of extreme inequality. Yeah, and I think that sense of precarity, that sense of continual risk creates stressors in people's lives that I think is contributing mightily to the craziness of our politics and our culture today. This is why people are so angry. Yeah, well, when you mentioned stress too, it makes me think of the health issues. So what we've seen in the United States before the pandemic is some kind of disturbing health trends where you have one part of the population getting healthier and healthcare, bravo living into their 90s and so on, but then serious health issues showing up pre-pandemic among large groups of the population. And I take this to be evidence of a distribution of risk. So we often look at distribution of income or the distribution of wealth, but in some ways what matters in a society that's collectively as wealthy as ours is not those numbers, but this distribution of risk and how volatile, precarious life is. And what the health numbers were suggesting pre-pandemic was very simply that we've distributed risk, we've jammed risk downward onto a big, people who somehow are willing to take it. Yeah, well, they actually weren't willing to take it, but we did it anyway. Yeah, there's that. Thank you, Neil, for the wisdom. But you're right, I think about the politics. I mean, the politics also is a big issue. I'd be curious to hear how you connect those issues, the sort of all the anxiety and so on that results from these structural economic factors to politics. Yeah, I mean, I think, what we've believed for a really long time is that the massive economic inequality that we've seen in our society has effectively shredded the reciprocity norms that make social cohesion and democracy possible. And you can't heal that with better political speeches. You can only heal that by paying most people in the economy substantially more. And a few people at the top, a little bit less. But short of that, you cannot fix this problem any other way, which I think is the, you know, effectively the central argument in your book that, you know, takes more than talk. You have to actually change the socioeconomic relationships. So most people both are and feel like they're included in a franchise. Yeah, and thanks for pointing out that that is a central argument of my book because for me, that is really important. In some ways, that is why I thought it was worth concentrating on the 9.9%. Because culturally, the biggest problem with the political culture of the 9.9% is that it's very happy to talk about all kinds of solutions as long as they don't address the big structural problems that we have, big structural economic problems. And I would just like to convey the point that you stated here so eloquently, make that, you know, unless we pay people better, they're gonna be unhappy and no grand speeches and, you know, no amount of virtue signaling and showing just how enlightened we are. It's gonna get us very far. That's right, yeah. So we love to complain about the traffic, but aren't willing to not jump in our suburban's every morning with a few of our children and drive them across town to the private schools that they attend. You're right. Right, and as you also point out, Matthew, that this really speaks to a fundamental misunderstanding of where wealth comes from. You know, we in the 9.9% like to think that we're here because we made the right choices and we're talented and we work hard and we've produced this wealth, but that's not where wealth actually comes from. Yeah, I mean, this is one of the ways in which I think an unequal society starts to become really unreasonable. It doesn't understand where value actually comes from. So I just take it as a very simple premise that most of the value that human societies produce comes from cooperation, comes from getting people to figure out how to work together. Some of it definitely comes from maximizing individual talents, because some people are really, really good at something or other, but in the broad mix of things, what matters far more is getting people to work together in happy, coherent, ethical ways. And what happens as inequality rises is that people develop a completely different theory. They think that there are a handful of superheroes, that somehow people like Elon Musk have IQs that can't be measured with an ordinary computing device because they're just so much better in every possible way. And that same logic extends farther down so that the people, the 9.9%, well, they're generating all the wealth out of their pure brain power, and they really don't need anybody else. And of course, this is a delusional state of being. This is just false. So it's not just that they're claiming more than they deserve in my mind. It's that they're misanalyzing where the wealth comes from. So I wanna write a book called The Origin of Wealth, but I hear the title's already been taken. Yeah, that title is taken. So Matthew, let's finish the interview up by talking about what we should do. What, as Americans, can we do to address this problem? Yeah, that's really important. I think that the, of course I write books, and I read about history of ideas and so on. So I'm really a pretty bad person to ask for specific policy advice. But so some of my suggestions are quite general. And I think one is that I would like collectively to think big and think politically. So when I say think big, I mean, I don't think adding a, just adding a public option on healthcare is quite enough. I think we need to go farther than that. I think that we should be thinking big in the sense of an economic bill of rights along the lines that FDR proposed. And I think that we have to do that politically. So I don't, I wanna start with that because I don't think that we can solve many of these problems without being political and without thinking about how these things can be implemented. But there is of course some room for individual action and community action. And I think that there it's a matter of, I think people looking at the local organizations in which they're involved and seeing how they can be improved. I mean, you don't have to be an MB and you don't have to take a narrow mind of you of how to have a better community around you. And you don't have to just move into the so-called good public school zone because you've been told it's basically, it's like a white school zone or something like that. So there are a lot of decisions that people can make that would perhaps free them up and also help open up the system from the ground. But I do think that most of the real action is gonna have to be political and hopefully it will involve some significant change. How important is self-awareness? Well, I think that self-awareness is critical. And I have to say, I get, I get, I'm into a little bit of a chicken and egg paradox here because my argument is that the economic structural factors are really working against self-awareness. I mean, when it's in our economic interest not to be self-aware, we tend not to be self-aware, but that's what we have to fight because I think that that's what's, if we could break, and this is the point, this is where books are useful. If we can break some number of people out of the narrow forms of thinking that the economic conditions create, well, then I think that can move things forward. So at the end of the day, if we were all self-aware, we probably wouldn't be facing most of these problems. So one final question, why do you do this work? I have limited abilities to contribute in a useful way to society. So for me, it's just, my one limited gift is writing, I think. And so I feel that if I can get the words out right and to get the message out right, it can shape a few people and make a slightly better book. That's my shtick. That's a great answer. Well, thank you again for being on the podcast again. Yeah, my pleasure. And best of luck with the book. We think it's really important. Yeah, absolutely love the book. All right, that's great. Well, thanks for having me again. We'll talk soon. So Goldie, do you feel guilty? Well, you know me, Nick, I was raised to feel guilty. That's just all a part of growing up and being Jewish. But yeah, you know, as I mentioned before the interview, I see myself in this book in a lot of ways. As a white male who went to an elite college and he spends a lot of time talking about elite education and how twisted it is, I look at myself and comparing myself to my cohort. You know, throughout my life, Nick, you know, I made a lot of decisions against building wealth and earning a lot of money. When the opportunities came along, I went the other way and pursued other interests. And yet, despite all of the bad economic choices I made, I still find myself in the 9.9% and it's largely due to the privilege of having grown up in the 9.9%. My story is really very typical. My parents sent me to an elite college and I came out with relatively little student debt. I graduated in 1985 into a job market where, oh, you're a smart kid from a good school. Here's the equivalent of $75,000 a year. And don't worry, we'll train you on the job. Largely, I'm in the 9.9% due to buying a house in Seattle, which by the way, I couldn't have bought without a down payment from my mother, who by the way, the house I grew up in outside of Philadelphia was bought with a down payment from her father. So it's this perpetuation where once you're in it, you've got all these advantages that set you up. And to be honest, a lot of the stupid choices I made, well, they're not stupid, I don't regret them, but a lot of the choices I made in my life that were not based on money, I was able to make because I had the privilege of knowing that I always had this family support system to fall back on if I ever needed it. And the fact that I didn't largely need it doesn't mean it wasn't there and didn't guide me through my life. And so I feel charmed that I've been able to end up as comfortably as I did. And on the other hand, I also see the precarity of it. I mean, I gotta tell you, I was not making much money before I went to work for you and I hadn't made much money for a decade. And my lifestyle has hardly changed at all, partially out of fear of what I'll need in retirement, but also because honestly, Nick, I wanna leave my daughter or something because I don't want her to fall out of the 9.9% because I see how mean and difficult it is out there for 90% of Americans. And it doesn't have to be this way. No, I think that the thing to really recognize is that I've seen the enemy and it is us. We have created these circumstances for ourselves. The fact that we're all competing madly to get our kids on select sports teams and into the best colleges turning ourselves inside out and into pretzels, that these are choices that we made collectively as a society and we could undo them as easily as we did them if we had the clarity of purpose and the moral intentionality that we should have. I just, it is a terrible shame. But again, at the end of the day, Matthew's argument in his book reinforces, I think, a really fundamental premise of the podcast, which is that if we want the country to be better then people have to feel better and if they want them to feel better, they're gonna have to actually do better and to actually do better, we're gonna have to pay them more. And if we did, a lot of this stuff would melt away. Both the raw economic, the math inequality, but also the cultural pathologies that come along with it. And I think at the end of the day, that's what it's all about. Right, in the end, it all comes down to inequality and maybe those of us in the 9.9% wouldn't be so jealously guarding our wealth and our status if the cliff that we've created wasn't so steep. Yeah, absolutely, that's it. On the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we'll be talking with journalist David Wessel about how a program that promised to drive economic development into struggling communities turned out to be a gold rush for the super rich. ["The Super Rich"] Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. week. See you next