 If there's one thing we've talked a lot about over the years, it has been the ways in which the economy is set up to advantage people with more money in no place is that more obvious than in the tax code. Basically, when black and white Americans engage in the same activity, whether it's getting married, whether it's buying a home or trying to build wealth, our tax system advantages how white Americans engage in the activity and at the same time disadvantage how black Americans engage in that activity. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. So, Goldie, if there's one thing we've talked a lot about on the podcast over the years, it has been the ways in which the economy is set up to advantage people with more money. And the way in which we preference capital over work and so on and so forth, and in no place is that more obvious than in the tax code. And we've talked about it a lot how if you're rich and have a ton of income, your rates are literally lower than if you were middle class and have a job. You mean like me? Yes, like you, specifically like you. I think you and I have not understood as clearly as the ways in which that system disproportionately disadvantages black families. And so today it'll be super interesting to talk to Dorothy Brown, a tax professor at Emory Law, who researches systemic racism in tax policy. I'm Dorothy Brown. I'm a tax law professor at Emory University and I'm the author of The Whiteness of Wealth, How the Tax System Impoverishes Black Americans and How We Can Fix It. First of all, I want to tell you how much I enjoyed the book. It was eye opening. We certainly understood that our tax system preferences wealthy people and therefore it would disadvantage black families since they are less wealthy. But I had no idea beyond that how much just the whole structure of the system disadvantaged black families. If you could start off by just giving us an overview. Sure. So my research uncovered, and let me be clear, I went into tax law thinking it had nothing to do with race. So Goldie, you are not alone. And what I discovered, I kind of fell into it because of my doing my parents taxes is basically when black and white Americans engage in the same activity, whether it's getting married, whether it's buying a home, paying for college for their kids, getting a job or trying to build wealth. Our tax system advantages how white Americans engage in the activity and at the same time disadvantage how black Americans engage in that activity. Give us an example that let's start with one of the biggies in your book, The Joint Return. Right. You know, the conventional wisdom is when you get married, you get a tax cut. And that's only true if you are in a household with primarily one wage earner and the other spouse stays at home or contributes very little to household income. That household actually gets a tax cut when they get married. But the household that doesn't get a tax cut are those where both spouses work full time and contribute roughly amount equal amounts to household income. That household can pay higher taxes when they get married. And when I looked at Census Bureau data, because let me just drop a footnote. The IRS does not publish statistics by race. So the only way I was able to find this out and the only way I was able to write the book was I had to become a detective digging through any kind of data that I could use for my income tax analysis. So the Census Bureau is a great data set because it's large. And what I discovered is white married couples were more likely to be in single wage earner households and eligible for the tax cut when they get married. But black married couples, regardless of income, were more likely to be in what I call marriage penalty households, 50-50, and therefore paying higher taxes. So when you think of marriage, white and black Americans do marriage differently. White Americans are more likely to be able to have one single wage earner, the second spouse works at home. Black married couples can't afford to do that. In order to produce a standard of living that's above the poverty line, basically you need two workers. This is just such an interesting example. And of course, the differences between these two modalities extends far beyond just how much tax you pay. But can you put some numbers to it? In the book, you use the example of two married households, one where one person earned 100,000 and the other spouse earned zero. And the second household where both earned 50,000 to make 100. So what are the actual dollars and cents implications of those two different circumstances? Right. So first, I'll say that the tax law treats those two households equally and believes the right answer is for those two households to pay the same amount of taxes. But the reality is a $50,000 job is very different than a $100,000 job. It's different in terms of the benefits that one might get. It's different in terms of the ability to work at home, something we saw through the pandemic. It's different in terms of the dual wage earner household has to figure out a way to pay for childcare. Right. They may need two cars to drive to work, whereas the $100,000 household, they don't necessarily need two cars. So those those households economically are very, very different. I'll walk you through it. So let's say the $100,000 wage earner doesn't get married. Yeah. And he pays taxes at X dollars. Right. When he gets married, he and his spouse pay taxes at X minus dollars. They get a tax cut. Right. Whereas the black married couple, they're paying taxes at, let's say half X. And when they get married, they pay taxes because of the marriage penalty at a hundred plus. Yeah. Plus, right. They wind up paying higher taxes than had they remain single in dollars and cents. What the tax law does is say the $100,000 household should pay taxes at the same level as the two $50,000 household. That results in a tax cut from what the hundred thousand single wage earner would earn. Right. That's in a perfect system. We didn't have a perfect system pre 2017. And what actually happened is the two $50,000 wage earners paid higher taxes than the hundred thousand dollar single wage earner couple. Amazing. Yes. And when they pay the same, it's just that the single earner got a tax cut and the double earners got a tax increase from marriage. And then on top of that, Dorothy, I think it's an important point that you make, which is the costs are very different because they're both working. That's right. Right. That's right. And our progressive income tax system is built on this notion of ability to pay. Why would you treat a single word, your radio in our household with a say in him's spouse as having the exact same ability to pay as two $50,000 workers? It makes no sense. Okay. So I guess the question is, how did we get here? If we go through the congressional record, it's not like Congress went and said, hey, let's let's let's write the tax law in such a way as to disadvantage black families. You won't find that intent anywhere. That legislative intent was the intention. But you will find legislative intent to write it to benefit rich white taxpayers like that's for sure. And Charlotte Seaborn, right? So we have the joint return because of this couple out of Seattle, Henry and Charlotte Seaborn, who were one of the few Americans in the late 1920s paying taxes and they didn't like it. So they engaged in self-help, I would argue, filing a fraudulent in return that created a deduction that didn't exist. And the IRS said, you can't do that. It went to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court said, oh yeah, you can do that. So we have tax policy that is intentionally designed to benefit rich white Americans. So you're right. There's no legislative history that says we want to harm black Americans, but we know when the joint return came into existence in 1948, there was a higher percentage of black married couples with wives working outside the home. So was it benign neglect? Was it just intentional benefits in favor of white taxpayers? I think it's the latter, which of course necessitates a discriminatory impact on the part of black taxpayers. So what are some other interesting examples of the ways in which the tax code is unfair in this way? So let's take homeownership. Lots of progressive Americans or policymakers think the reason why black Americans don't have more wealth is we need more black homeowners. And what the research shows is black homeownership has different wealth implications than white homeownership. And that is a function of where homeowners live and the fact that we have segregated housing. But when you talk about the tax breaks, if you sell your home for a half a million dollar, will you sell your home at a gain up to half a million dollars if you're married, you can receive tax free. If you sell your home at a loss, there's no tax break. You would look at that and say, wow, isn't that a great benefit? Everybody can build wealth up to half a million dollars tax free. But the problem is you have white homeowners more likely to have that half a million dollar gain and more black homeowners more likely to have a non tax deductible loss. So our tax laws benefit how white Americans own homes and disadvantage how black Americans own homes. And this difference in appreciation in houses between white homeowners and black homeowners, as you point out in the book, that's no longer that's not due to legal red lining. And right we used to have it's the preferences of white homeowners. Correct, correct. Because white homeowners are the majority of home of the home buying population. And white homeowners preferences are to live in almost all white neighborhoods. So for example, there's sociology research that did video experiments and they had they had the same neighborhood with the same amenities. But the only difference was the race of the actors walking through the neighborhood. In video number one, all white actors in video number two, all black actors in video number three, 60 percent white, 40 percent black actors. And they had people look at these neighborhoods, look at these videos and say, where do you want to live? The white viewers wanted to live in the all white neighborhood and the black viewers wanted to live in either the racially diverse or all black neighborhoods. So you can't say it's because white homeowners want safer neighborhoods with less crime and better schools, because when you show a video that has all of that equalized, they still pick the neighborhood that's all white. And this creates a catch-22 for black homeowners, doesn't it? Because if they want this kind of appreciation that the white homeowners get, they need to move into the white neighborhood. But if too many black families move into the white neighborhood, the white families move out and they don't get the appreciation. That's absolutely true. That's part of the problem. You move into the neighborhood and then you have to literally root against other black people living and moving into the neighborhood. The other problem is if you are one of the only black families in the neighborhood, you're going to be you have the potential to be subjected to lots of problems. Your neighbors don't know a black person lives in the neighborhood. So when you're trying to get in your own home, they'll call the cops. If you have children, your children may be targeted for discipline, for engaging in the exact same behavior that white peers do. But the teacher sees a discipline problem when it's a black child acting up and they don't see it. They see a child who is intellectually curious when it's a white child acting up. So there are all kinds of problems associated, or I would say drawbacks associated with a black American moving into an all white neighborhood and having their home be a good financial investment. Yeah. And just parenthetically, and this doesn't speak to the federal tax code, but certainly to local property tax codes, what's now pretty well understood is how disadvantaged poorer neighborhoods and therefore black neighborhoods are in terms of property tax rates versus the wealthiest neighborhoods. That's absolutely true. Yeah. That we now can see there's a lot of new data coming out that shows that, not surprisingly, that where the houses are most expensive, the rates are effectively lowest and where the houses are the least expensive, the rates are effectively highest. There's research that shows when you compare property tax rates of black homeowners versus white homeowners, that white homeowners have lower tax rates and it's a function of what Nick said, white homeowners are more likely to appeal, but there's also this idea that black homes are valued, the assessment of black homes is not based on the market reality, that white homeowners value them less. So you'll put an appraiser or an assessor will put a value on a black home that's wildly out of proportion to what they would actually get if they sold a house. And of course, we've seen newspaper stories recently on what happens when you actually appraise black homes, that when the appraiser comes in and thinks it's owned by a black person, the appraiser comes in at less than $100,000 lower. And then when a different appraiser comes in and a white person is sitting there, the ratio comes back much higher. If you had a blank slate to rewrite the tax code with no political considerations, what would you do? The benevolent dictator question. So you do it the way you want it. I would tax first all income the same income from stock would be taxed at the same rate structure as income from wages. There'd be no preferential rate. And I would have very few, if any exclusions, there'd be one deduction for what I call a living allowance, which meant if you didn't earn enough from your job to get out of poverty, not actually get out of poverty, to have a sustainable lifestyle, a living allowance, then if you didn't earn enough, the federal government would write you a check for the difference. And if you earned more than that, you would pay taxes at the progressive tax rate. So there'd be pretty much no loopholes. Okay. No loopholes, no deductions, no home mortgage interest deduction. No, you'd have this living allowance deduction and that's it. No capital gains. Well, what about the step up basis on capital gains? Oh, that's, that's gone. Oh God, I love it. This is the, uh, what about the carried interest loophole? That's going, sorry. Now you just talk to me softballs. You know, Republicans talk about simplifying the tax code. I'm happy to do, but eliminate all deductions. That's right. That's right. And they don't want simplification that way. They want extreme complexity when it helps themselves and their donors. They're not really interested in tax simplification. And I think you mentioned in the book that the, the, the number of people who itemize, uh, which was already very low is much lower after the 2017 reforms. That's absolutely right. So it used to be that it's not an, I almost chose all the word, but okay. It used to be about a third of Americans itemized. Now it's closer to 12 or 13%. So I think we actually can get some things done. We can, I think because the itemized deductions impact fewer and fewer Americans who are richer and richer that we're, we may be in a moment where we see some movement here. Like the mortgage interest deduction could actually go. Yeah. Or, or at least you could divide it by every American. Yeah. Like, I mean, fine. Incentivize it, but just take that, whatever it is, 60 or 80 billion bucks a year and divide it equally among the people who buy the houses. Not don't give this massive advantage. Well, I'm not the renters. Well, that's the problem, right? That's, that's the problem because homeownership has always been raised in America. So the minute you give subsidies to homeownership, you're going to disproportionately benefit white Americans who are the majority of homeowners. And we say we don't allow a deduction for rent because that's a personal expense, but so is a home. So we make all kinds of exceptions that just so happen to disproportionately benefit white Americans while disadvantaging black Americans. Unfortunately, Dorothy, you're not our benevolent dictators. So you can't rewrite the tax code. In the current system we have right now and not just the tax code, but just the larger economic and social environment. What are your recommendations to black families? Yeah. So I, I recommend black Americans recognize that they have to take a defensive posture. So if you're going to buy a home, well, one, if you're going to get married, delay it until if you're going to get married on New Year's Eve, don't do it. Wait till January one. Right. So that's off the issue for at least one more year. If you're going to buy a home, then don't be house poor. If you're living in a racially diverse or all black neighborhood, you can be house poor if you're living in a white neighborhood, but not in a racially diverse or black neighborhood. Do not take home equity loans if you're living in a racially diverse or black neighborhood and whatever money you save by not being house poor, put it into your retirement account and max out or start a five 29 child savings account for your child or a niece or nephew. If you work and have access to an employer provided retirement account to the extent you are financially able max out, think about, you know, right now we do have these tax subsidies that are disproportionately benefiting white Americans. Let's make sure that to the extent we can, they start to benefit black Americans as well. And you point out in the book that, you know, you recommend stocks that there are no white, white stocks and black stocks, unlike white neighborhoods and black neighborhoods. Right. So I do think investing in a stock market is a way to go. The problem is the financial services industry does not see black Americans as a potential target market. So if you have money to invest, how do you know where to invest it? And how do you know someone's not trying to take advantage of you? Because we also have a history of the financial services industry of targeting high income black and Latino Americans for subprime mortgages. Right. So what you need is the financial services industry to take a good hard look at themselves and do better. And what is your right? Yeah. What is your recommendation to, to white people? If we want to address this, what do we have to do? Well, first, I talk about acknowledging the family financial transfers you've gotten along the way. You know, grandparents paid for college or parents paid for K through 12. How are you in the position you got yourself in? A lot of white Americans like to think they did it because of hard work. And there was some hard work, but there was also some luck. You were born white to parents who had some wealth and they were able to provide for you to go to college without having significant student loan debt to buy a home because you didn't have to worry about paying for a down payment or grandma died and you inherited the home. So talk about those stories of luck. And if you happen to be a white homeowner in a racially diverse neighborhood, don't center yourself, but come into the neighborhood like you are new and sit there and listen to what the existing or the long-term homeowners are thinking about changing and not coming in and making the neighborhood mold to your will. And we need to, I guess, advocate for things that don't necessarily advantage us financially. Absolutely. I mean, for example, is it fear that black Americans have been paying higher taxes than their white peers know? Well, what's the solution for white people to pay higher taxes, to pay their fair share? That's what the conversation in Washington, DC has been about. Who's going to pay higher taxes? And yeah, white Americans who have been skating off the backs of black taxpayers need to step up and advocate for tax reform that benefits black Americans. I was really struck by the marriage deduction example and how different it really is to have two taxpayers paying with both contributing 50 to make 100 versus one at 100 because those circumstances are profoundly different. And like treating those two circumstances the same, I really do think it just doesn't make very much sense. And while there are millions of black families who would agree with that, the good news is that there are many, many, many millions more white families who would also agree with that. Right. Which is where political consensus comes from and action, right? I actually think the reason why the 2017 Tax Act solved the marriage penalty for so many families was because my research showed white married couples were becoming more and more subject to the marriage penalty that black married couples had always been paying. So over time, white married couples started looking like black married. Absolutely. And not like the seaborn. So suddenly out of nowhere, we get this marriage penalty fix in the 2017 Tax Act. I'll drop a footnote here. But it did nothing to fix the marriage penalties in the earned income tax credit. So there were certain families that the Trump folks cared about fixing, but how it fixed it was to increase the marriage bonus. So we have white couples getting an even greater marriage bonus to ensure black Americans' taxes don't go up when they get married. Black married couples still don't get a tax cut, but I digress. Yeah. So I think we're at the end of our time, but we always have a final question. And I happen to know you have a really great answer to this question, which is why do you do this work? I do it because I think I'm right. And I want to push for reform. I do it because I can't not do it. I think it's important that our race and tax statistics be published. I think Treasury's refusal to do it and the IRS's refusal to do it will not stand given the president's racial equity order. So I think I'm actually close to winning this one. I love it. So Goldie, I know we discussed it a lot in the interview, but I was just really fascinated and taken by the difference in circumstances between two joint filers, married couples, never occurred to me until I read it in her book, what a big difference there is between a married couple where one person earns 100,000 and the other person earns zero and two people, both of whom earn 50,000. And how the tax code treats those is identical. But of course the circumstances are so different. Forget the amount of tax that you pay, just the implication of the childcare costs that a married couple, both of whom work, have to deal with. The transportation challenges, like picket, like there isn't a thing that isn't different between those two circumstances. And it's even more nuanced than that because as Dorothy points out, the type of job that pays you 50,000 versus the type that pays you 100,000 is very different and tends to come with much fewer benefits. There's obvious things like 401k. If your employer is doing a 3% match, well, that's a much larger amount of money on $100,000 income than on a $50,000 income. But also you're much less likely to have that match. You're much less likely to have employer provided health insurance. No, it's super interesting. Obviously there are a ton of things to change within our tax code. She talks about this in the book, how we should be looking at wealth, not income in terms of the tax code a lot more. In 2016, the median wealth of white households was $171,000, which is not a ton. It's not a lot of money. You need more than that if you're going to retire in Seattle. But the median wealth of black households was one-tenth of that. It was only $17,100. And she also points out in the book that white families are equally likely to have zero wealth or be millionaires, whereas black families are 20 times more likely to have zero or negative wealth than to be millionaires. So it's a huge difference in terms of the lived experience in America. And that's why it's worth leaning into these issues. In the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we get to talk to two pals of mine, Dr. Eric Beinacher and Dr. Don Farmer, both at the Institute for New Economic Thinking at Oxford University, about the economics of climate change. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.