 Hey, it's Zach. I'm the president of Civic Ventures. Before I worked here with Nick, I was a political operative. That means that I was paid to win political campaigns. I've done a lot of thinking about what does all this economics mean for how we win? I have to say that some of the people I've talked to that I find the most interesting are the ones who are thinking very hard about how we win on economics. The question that is probably the most important question there is, how do we win on growth? What we mean by that is how do we convince the average American that our policies are going to benefit them? It's both going to be policies that are good for them in terms of equity and justice and fairness but also it's going to be good for them in terms of it's going to improve their lives and make their futures brighter. For a long time, progressives and Democrats, they were not able to answer this question. I thought I'd call my friend Michael Linden to talk to him about it. Hey, Michael, it's Zach. Zach, how are you, man? I'm good. I'm Michael Linden, I'm the executive director of the Groundwork Collaborative, which is an economic policy focused organization based here in Washington. I'm also a fellow at the Rosemount Institute. That's great. How long have you been in DC, Michael? I've been in DC for 13 years. I got here in the summer of 2007. I was born and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. My parents still live there and I go back all the time. I try to keep one foot in non-DC world. That's good. As a reminder, you spent some time on the Hill too in addition to the work you're doing outside, right? I did. I did. I spent a couple of years working for Senator Patty Murray. You're familiar with her, of course. She was the chair of the Budget Committee when I joined the Budget Committee in 2013, I think it was, or maybe early 2014. Then after the 2014 election, she became the ranking member on the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. I went with her to that committee and worked on economic policy from that perch. You've got an insider's view and an outsider's view. That always makes you more valuable than many of your fellow DC residents. Well, most DC residents are regular everyday Americans doing normal everyday jobs. It's always important to remember that 700,000 people live here in DC and most of them are doing jobs that you would find in any other town. None of them have a vote in Congress. That's my normal plug for DC statehood. Yeah, right on. DC statehood, I'm all there. Hey, so we're going to talk about winning on growth. There's obviously a lot of conversation about the economy. The president in some ways wants to make this election about the economy. We have this presidential nomination process for the Democrats where there's a lot of chatter about how best to talk about the economy. We read about it, it seems like every day. Of course, we here at Pitchfork Economics and our podcast, we talk a lot about economics and pitchforks roughly in that order. One of the things I've appreciated about what you guys have done is you have really done some probing into this idea that you can and should win on growth with some pretty specific ideas about how that might happen. Can you unpack that for us? Yeah, for sure. I think the first thing to understand is that when most people think about growth, they aren't actually thinking about gross domestic product. Most people don't know what GDP is, nor should they. I think when we talk about growth and when we use it from an economic standpoint, I think we should remember that most people think of it as, are things getting better? Are things better for me and my family? Can I imagine them getting better for my children over time? Are things better tomorrow than they are today? That is the economic concept on which I think progressives absolutely have to win. It is true that when there's more to go around, when we have grown, when our economy has gotten bigger, it is usually the case that everybody is doing better off. But it is not always the case. One of the things that's really important to remember, I think from a both political standpoint and an economic standpoint, is that we are really talking about our people's lives getting better, or the vast majority of people's lives getting better. That is shorthand. The term growth, I think, is shorthand for that. Now, there's obviously a technical definition that economists use, but every day Americans are thinking about that shorthand. One of the challenges that we have as progressives is that for the last 40 years, the American public has been told that there is a trade-off between that idea of growth, things are getting better, and a general conception of what you might call fairness, a system that is fair. It's true that Americans want a system that is fair. They want people to have a fair shot. They want people to be playing by the same rules. But they've been told that you can either have fairness or you can have growth. Yeah, that it's a choice. It is a choice. If you have more fairness, you'll get less growth, and if you have more growth, you might get less fairness, but everybody will be better off because there's more growth. Remember, that's what people think of as growth. Things are getting better. We have to break that trade-off. It turns out from an economic standpoint, from an empirical standpoint, it's wrong. It's just wrong. It is not true that a system that is more, quote-unquote, fair leads to less growth. In fact, it's quite the opposite, but we really have to prove that to the American people because we have been told for such a long time that that is a fundamental trade-off in the economy, and it's wrong. We have to fight on those terms. I really appreciate that redefinition. We talk a lot around here, this obsession that the political press corps and elites have with these, what are just, let's admit it, artificial numbers as a way to define growth. The GDP is up, the stock market is up. Even the jobs numbers don't actually speak to, is your life improving, is the average Americans' lives improving? By the way, this is a phenomenon that was at play under the Obama administration. They perpetually touted how great their top-line numbers were, but if you looked at the election of 2016, a lot of people were hurting and didn't look at that economy and say, I see myself in this, I see my life getting better. Now it's even worse under Trump, of course, because by almost every metric, people's lives are harder than they were when the president was elected. But this obsession by the elites and the media storytellers with those old metrics, it's not this question of, is my life better, the average American? Yeah, that's right. It comes from, old is the right word. It's this old idea of how the economy is supposed to work. It is true that it used to be that if overall GDP was going up, that was a relatively good proxy for a typical middle-class family, typical white middle-class family, we should say, which is certainly how most of the economic elites thought of things in the 50s, 60s, 70s, and 80s. It used to be that when the economy overall was getting bigger, that everyday people, by and large, were feeling some effect of that. That relationship got divorced in the 1980s and 1990s and 2000s, and over the last 40 years, it's no longer the case that just because the overall economy is getting bigger, that everyone is doing better. That's because the economy has really become very concentrated. All of the power, all of the money, all of the wealth has become concentrated at the very, very top, and it allows people at the top to essentially siphon off the gains from overall growth. This is why it's really important to think about growth as, are people's lives actually getting better? Overall growth for growth's sake, where all the gains are going to the top 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, that doesn't mean very much to people. That's great. Oh, good. GDP is up by 4%. My wages are the same as they've been for the last 10 years. Which of those two things matters more to people? Definitely the latter. Or hey, the economy is getting bigger and going up, but so are my healthcare premiums. The healthcare premiums is the part that actually matters to people. We really have to focus on growth as a shorthand for people's well-being. It is also true. I will say, I know this is a bit of a debate even on the left here, but it is also true that when there is more to go around, it should make it easier for everybody's lives to be getting better. That's why it is important for us to be talking about growing the economy overall. It's not just that there's more to go around, it actually has to go around. There can be more to go around, but it's all still in Jeff Bezos' house. It doesn't really work that way. I do think there's this obsession with these top line numbers, GDP, the stock market is completely... My quick rant about the stock market, which I'll always say to people, is most Americans don't own a single share of stock, even in retirement accounts. The top 10% of Americans own roughly 80% of the value of the entire stock market. The stock market is only a good metric of how rich people are doing. It's not a good metric of the economy. We've really got to find a different way to measure how regular people are doing. You know, one of the things about the old that got confused is that there was this idea that if the tide is rising, all boats will rise. One of the things that they really misunderstood is what was causing the tide to rise. What really got gummed up is this idea that if we cut taxes for the wealthy and powerful, deregulate the powerful in corporations and suppress wages, that's what causes the tide to rise. That is just, as you know, horseshit. Part of it is because it is mixing cause and effect, the cause of that rising tide in which everybody did prosper, mostly as you said before, white people, but the idea was this the rising tide was being caused by making massive investments in people, by having smart, high standards in our regulatory regimes, and of course by focusing on wages and really fair worker standards. Those are the things that were happening in the 40s, 50s, and 60s that were producing all this growth. Then, obviously, it all gets unwound and it's not a surprise that once you decoupled smart policies that were good for working people from growth, the growth was happening, but people weren't benefiting. That's exactly right. I think that's such a smart point that the problem with the rising tide lifts all boats metaphor is it gets the causality exactly backwards. What you just said is exactly right. Unfortunately, we don't have a good metaphor that really captures that because you can't really be like, well, listen, what we did is we invested in a lot of different boats and that's what got the tide to rise. We put so many boats in the ocean, the tide rose, that metaphor doesn't quite work, but that is the actual causality. It's not a surprise that in the early 1980s when we did a couple of big changes to our federal policy that then filtered out into the States, we cut taxes for rich people and corporations, we basically stopped prosecuting antitrust claims and we let these giant corporations just get bigger and bigger and we allowed and facilitated an attack on unions. We did all of those things while pursuing a trade policy that essentially allowed corporations to outsource enormous numbers of jobs without ever compensating people who lost out on that. Then you ended up with an economy where it's really, really good if you're rich and for everybody else, it's a really, really tough slog. Out of curiosity, who is doing this well? When you look out in the landscape, are there institutions, individuals that are talking about winning on growth or this kind of lens well? Yeah, I think there are people who are coming around to it and look, it's like any other big change in the way we think of anything. It takes time and it takes effort and it takes lots of different people saying this in lots of different ways to really seep in. I know whose podcast this is, but I think Nick Hanauer does a good job of talking about where does growth and prosperity come from. One of the things that I really like about his conception of this is he really puts at the center of the economic story a new hero, the hero that we have been told of the economic story for the last 40 years is rich people who quote unquote create jobs. You think about the term job creator, it really boils down the entire overarching narrative of how the economy works incorrectly into those two words. Rich people sitting in a boardroom decide today we will create two jobs. Great, good job everybody and then they leave. That's a great little two word phrase, but in fact, they're not the hero of the economic story. The hero of the economic story is everyday people who get up every morning and go to work and take care of their families and their communities and it's their hard work and their consumption and their ingenuity that actually drives an economy. I think that Nick does a very nice job of centering regular everyday hardworking people as the hero of the economic story and that is what leads to growth. I think that's one example. I'm a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute. I think there's a bunch of people at Roosevelt who've done a really nice job of talking about this. I think Heather Boucher, who is the executive director of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, their entire mission is to talk about equitable growth, growth that actually produces an economy where people are seeing those gains on an equitable basis. So I think that's really, really valuable. I hesitate to name names in the political sphere because I don't want to take sides, but I think there are some folks who are running for president or who are in the Senate or who are in the House who are talking about a progressive vision for growth and how do we make an economy so that people are doing better over time. Well, it does seem to have been a shift. I've been a close observer of this for a while now. Obviously, Nick has been a big part of that and he's got a platform, but it used to be a feeling of being out in the wilderness largely alone. Now there seems to be a group of fellow travelers, some of whom you have already outlined it. Something has changed. Yeah, absolutely. I think there's a couple things that's changed. First of all, it's really hard to have moved through the last 10 years. The enormity of the Great Recession, the response to the Great Recession, politically and economically, the slowness of the recovery, the fact that here we are 10 years later since the recession has technically ended and a long-term unemployment is still elevated, wages are growing at much slower rates than you would expect given the unemployment rate. All of these things, it's very hard to have lived through these last 10 years and look around and say, oh yeah, everything's fine. Everything's working the way it should. I think that just the facts on the ground have really led to a rethinking of how the economy operates. Then I also think that there's just been an enormous amount of empirical research, just flat out economics research, economists who are winning awards left and right for their cutting edge research and they're showing things that just don't comport with that conception of how the economy was supposed to have worked over the last 40 years. That just takes time to filter into our brains. I think that is starting to happen. I think that's a big reason. Then, of course, we should not ignore the election of Donald Trump, which I think really sparked, especially on the left, a rethinking of what kind of an economic story we are telling and how it is or is not resonating with everyday people and fitting in with their lived experience. I think all three of those things have really come together to produce this moment where there is real change. You're absolutely right. There's a lot more people out there talking about what a new vision of how the economy should operate can look like. There's very good reasons to do this for storytelling purposes. There's obviously excellent reasons to do this for policy purposes and improving people's lives. Then the other thing is it's a winner. As you said, you are centering a super majority of the population as the heroes of the story. You could confront the lies that our opponents are telling as they're trying to protect the narrow interests of the top 10 percent. Most importantly, people want this idea that you're telling me I don't have to choose between fairness and growth, that if I get fairness, I get growth. If I treat people better and I myself am treated better, my life is going to improve and my future for my children is going to improve. Who wouldn't choose that, right? Right. That's exactly right. We are telling them based on actual empirical research, we're not just making it up, that the values they already hold, fairness, justice, inclusion, stability, security, that these things are actually smart economic strategies. We can back it up. We can back it up with research and examples and policy, but we should tell people that those values that they already hold are smart economics. The problem is that for the last 40 years, they've been told that those values that they hold are not good economics, that they can either choose those values or they can be for a strong economy. That is backward. Where does this conversation take place in community? There's obviously political operatives and fellows at think tanks and people who work in DC politics. It's important they're having this conversation, but is there a way that people who might be listening to this podcast that aren't involved in that way, how do they start having these conversations? How do they engage in this? That's a great question. I think it sort of depends. If it's somebody who's listening right now and they're interested in politics and economics, but they don't necessarily get involved in local issue advocacy or local politics, that's fine. I think the way that they start having these conversations is they bring it up with their friends and families and they start noticing maybe some of the evidence around them that shows that this intuition that they have and that this new way of thinking of the economy really is true. Hey, did you notice that in Seattle after they raised the $15 minimum wage, there are more restaurant jobs than there were before? Just kind of talking about this stuff and seeing it in their own lives, I think is actually super valuable because I think the only way that we change the overarching worldview that people have around how the economy works is that they hear it, folks have to hear it so many different times and from different people. Hopefully they're hearing it on this podcast and internalizing it and thinking it's interesting and valuable, but they also need to hear it from their neighbors, from their friends, from their coworkers, from their religious leaders. And certainly that's how the dominant conservative economic worldview got adopted. People were hearing it in lots of different places. So even if you're not deeply involved in politics or economics, I think just having conversations with people and seeing what feels resonant from this, I think is a really important way to get involved. If you are involved in local advocacy or local issues, then the thing I would ask is think about how your issue fits into this broader framework, which is not to say you don't need to focus on your issue, you should, but almost everything that folks are fighting for out in all 50 states, higher minimum wage, paid family medical leave, higher taxes on the wealthy, ending cash bail, immigration reform, you name it, all of those things actually fit into this broader framework of how to build an economy that is growing and growing for regular people. That's great. We always ask people one last question before we leave them and that's why do you do this work? I mean, I genuinely believe that we can have a country and a society where the vast majority of people are doing better every day and that their children are going to do better than they did. I think we've lost our way on that question and it's important that we get it back. And I'll say one other thing, one other thing that really motivates me, especially right now, a new economic worldview is coming, whether we like it or not. In some ways, Donald Trump represents the beginnings of this new worldview. He is in many ways just a vestige of the old worldview. He loves cutting taxes for rich people. He loves deregulating for corporations. He loves Wall Street. That's all the normal conservative trickle down stuff. That's nothing that is new. But what Trump does represent is an approach where he is weaponizing dog whistle, race-based xenophobic attacks to build an economic paradigm or worldview that basically says, we're going to do all the things that we should be doing, but only for essentially white working class people or white people, frankly, and white native born people. And so we have a choice going forward. We can either have a post neoliberal world that is multiracial and inclusive and really lives our values, or we can have a kind of Trumpian worldview where he's using the power of the government to protect his narrow base and his friends. So we kind of have to win that fight. And it's a fight, by the way, that's happening all over the world. You see it with the rise of right wing authoritarians all over the world. And we have to win that fight. And we have to show that multiracial inclusive economy and democracy is the only path forward. Wow. Well, Michael, it's always a pleasure to talk to you. And I'm really glad to be in the fight with you. Same here. Thank you for having me. This is really fun. Terrific. I'll see you the next time. Sounds good. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.