 Legislatures around the country and the Supreme Court are making participation harder, not easier. Participation in not just in the economy, but in the democracy. But in the democracy. Right. You're saying a process of othering, devaluing human beings, and the solution to it is belonging. Inclusion is kind of something that happens to you. Like, you can be included. Whatever is belonging is something that we do together. From the home offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, the best place to get the truth about who gets what and why. Contrary to what you may have learned in your Econ 101 textbook, we believe that diversity and inclusion are actually primary drivers of economic growth and prosperity. But unfortunately, well, this is a pretty diverse country, Nick. We're not really all that inclusive. No, we are not at all. And it's in many ways getting worse, not better. Concentrations of power at the top are increasing, not decreasing. Both legislatures around the country and the Supreme Court in particular are making participation harder, not easier. Participation in not just in the economy, but in the democracy. And in civil society. That's right. And obviously this is in many ways going in the wrong direction, but is the consequence of decades of momentum created by neoliberal economic policy and the increasing radicalization of an increasingly racist and existentially threatened right wing. But today we get to talk to a really super interesting person who's on the other side of that argument on our side. John A. Powell is the director of the Othering and Belonging Institute at the University of California, Berkeley. And he's an internationally recognized expert in the area of civil rights, civil liberties, structural racism, housing, poverty, and democracy. And I think this is going to be a really interesting podcast that will delve deeply into the philosophical underpinnings of the wrong way of thinking about it and the right way of thinking about how to build a high functioning society and democracy. My name is John Powell. I'm a professor at University of California, Berkeley, and the director of the Othering and Belonging Institute. And I teach in the law school, African American Studies and Ethnic Studies. And we promote the idea of belonging through the lens of targeting universalism and bridging. So John, start off by telling us what the Othering and Belonging Institute is and what you guys do. We do a lot of things. We're fairly good sized. We have about 120 professors and depending on how you count it, about 70 staff. We have about 10 staff in Europe. We do research from top to bottom. I think we have at least one, maybe two Nobel laureates affiliated with the Institute. We work with grassroots organizers. We work with churches. We work with some of the largest companies in the world. Work with hundreds of governments. And we do everything from original research to implementation to evaluation to helping people frame things. We work in the mind science area. So as you might imagine, the framework of Othering and Belonging initially was the Haas Institute for Fair and Inclusive Society. And I should add that one of the clusters, we have seven clusters where the professors cluster around certain themes. And one of them is economics and also around populations. So we really cover the waterfront, which makes it hard. When you do everything, it's hard to give a particular example. But there must be a through line. Yeah, the through line is belonging. So we feel that the world is organized largely around some groups being considered not full people, not full citizens, not full members to be exploited, to be used. And that takes on different forms. It takes on the form of race sometimes. It takes on the form of disability sometimes. It can take on a combination of that. Takes on, we're looking at it right now with the Supreme Court in terms of gender, who gets the right to vote, whose point count. So we think about that. If you think about that in terms of this country, you'd come to the history of enslavement, taking out Native American land, immigration. All of those things are expressions of saying certain groups of people don't belong. That expression also constitute some sense of the group that apparently Belis belongs. But we can talk about each one of those separately, and we have. But we also think the through line is that you're seeing a process of othering, devaluing human beings, and the solution to it is following. In terms of the economy, in terms of health, in terms of schools, in terms of civic participation, in terms of money, what would a really side this thriving and people's worth as people's and participants look like? One of my favorite examples of that by you makers and takers. Yes. I think people. Rami talked about that well in Paul Ryan, right? It's the sort of canonical expression of neoliberalism or trickle down economics, right? There's a few people at the top that are worthy. Right. And everybody else is a, you know, or Reagan's thing of the truly deserving poor. Yes. I'm like, some people are deserving and some matter. Yeah, we get to decide who they are. Right. Right. And, you know, we're excited to talk to you because we believe that, you know, you know, Orthodox economic theory and it's sort of weaponized ideological expression, neoliberalism or market fundamentalism or whatever you call it is largely a protection racket for the rich. It's a narrative designed by and for people at the top to exclude, you know, the participation of most people. I think that's right. I would maybe even broaden it a little bit because in some fashion, one could argue that the current version of the economics on neoliberalism and coming out of really the 70s and 80s. Yeah. But before that, even then the economy was not really structured for people to fully participate in to have what they need to thrive. And some can argue now, partially through the work of Trump and others, we're experiencing kind of ethnic nationalism, but also economic nationalism. So I just want to make clear to your listeners that there are many different ways of arranging economy so it doesn't work. Yeah. You know, liberalism is just one expression. Yeah. Racism and sexism are other expressions. Yeah. Or, you know, sort of ranked nationalism. Right. It's like where you have protectionism and just trying to protect your part of the world. Colonialism. I mean, one thing that's interesting is that after World War Two, the English were mad at the United States because the United States wouldn't help England hold on to its colonies. In the United States, the notion was no, you can open up markets so we can take them. But it was a colonial market before World War Two. That neoliberal, but it still was not serving people. I mean, we talk a lot about diversity and inclusion from a kind of abstract economic perspective, how they drive growth. And of course, America is very diverse. It's not nearly as inclusive as it is diverse. Are things getting worse? I mean, what is the state of affairs in terms of belonging and othering in the US today? Well, I think we're moving in multiple directions at the same time. We're in a lot of turmoil. Some people talk about an inflection point, certainly since the pandemic. Obviously, the Supreme Court threatening to overturn Roe v. Wade. They've already overturned voting. They overturn money in terms of the political discourse with Citizens United. The governor of Texas just announced that maybe all children shouldn't have a right to public education. So the right wing, they're not conservatives. We're talking about they're not conservatives. They have a radical right wing agenda that's rooted on racial and ethnic nationalism. And they're gaining some steam. They're not a majority. And majorities should count in the democracy. If we had a democracy, we don't really have a democracy. But at the same time, you have a large number of people really for the first time thinking about what does equality and equity and even belonging really means? We have the largest set of demonstrations in support of some concept of equality, racial equality and beyond after George Floyd's death that was unprecedented. So I think it's too easy to sort of look at one part of that and say, we lost. Or the other part of that and say, we won. We're in the middle of a pitch fight. And the important thing is to be in that fight and understand what we're fighting for and what we're fighting against. You know, we'll get to it a little further when we talk about your notion of targeted universalism, but in terms of outcomes, what would you say? What would belonging and inclusion look like from an economic perspective in particular, but broadly as well? Well, a few things. I wrote a piece several years ago looking at poverty. And I basically said, poverty is not simply lack of stuff, especially in the United States. It's lack of belonging. It's lack of belonging, is saying society doesn't regard you as a full member. And that shows up in economic terms and working terms and working condition terms. It also shows up in terms of voice. Joseph Spicklett in one of his recent books argued that economic crisis is really a political crisis. You know, we have to think about who is structuring our tax codes, who is structuring property. These are political questions that in some sense precede economic questions. And we used to talk about political economy. And partially as a result of neoliberalism, we think of the economy as a freestanding thing, or as this sort of market fundamentalism, which is not. And the country has grown. The promise with neoliberalism and globalization, the way it took shape, was that we grow the economy and everybody would be better off. Half of that was apparently true. That is, the size of the economy since the 1970s, depending on how you count it, is three or four times larger. But people are not three or four times better off, unless you're Elon Musk, or unless you're head of Amazon, unless you're head of, you know, so one of these large companies. So we've seen more wealth come into society and even the world, but it being concentrated in fewer and fewer people. And what they're doing with that wealth is actually using it in large part to structure systems to perpetuate it and continue to protect themselves. The point is that the idea of a democracy and the idea of belonging go hand in hand. Belonging is more than inclusion. Inclusion is you're joining something that belongs to someone else. You're a guest. You get to join a company. You get to join a school. But the rules, the norms, the structure has been set by someone else. That's inclusion. I give an example. It's like if I give a party, all of you are invited, but it's my music, my friends, my food. Don't come in messing with the furniture. That's not your job. Just come in and have a good time and then leave. That's inclusion. Belonging is that it's not my party. It's not your party. It's our party. And so this fight, even like who does the country belong to? Who does the planet belong to? It doesn't belong to, it shouldn't belong to the billionaires and multibillionaires. It shouldn't belong to one racial or ethnic group. It belongs to all of us. And we get to co-create it. So the watchword is co-create. Co-create is another word for a strong democracy that we get to actually. And it's not formalized in the sense of every four years we have a ritual of voting for two candidates of the time. Neither of which do we like. The whole structure of our democracy is actually structured not to be a democracy. It's structured to best be a republic and even worse than that. So belonging would actually say, hmm, let me think about this. We say you can change the constitution, but we make it virtually impossible. So you can change it. It's like if you can get 100% of the votes, you can do whatever you want to. But you're never going to get 100% of the votes. So we created these mechanisms so that in theory we can make some changes in the country. But it's virtually, it's extremely difficult. It's the way of protecting their leads. And then the last example I'll give is Citizens United. Citizens United is an interesting case. And it goes back to really the 1900s because corporations were part of government when the country first started. They were not independent. And it was a famous case, the Charles River case, where companies basically said they should not long be under the heel of government. They should be independent. And it was very controversial because even then corporations had a lot of power. And the court agreed with corporations, but the false deal was they can amass independence and wealth, but they can't use their independence and wealth to infect politics. There's a wall between corporations and politics. And that wall crumbled starting late in the 19th century. But then with Citizens United, we devastated the wall. So now you take all of that wealth, power, and money and you allow it to really distort our economy. In an article I wrote, I basically say when corporations are in the same sphere as citizens, then citizens don't belong. They push citizens out of the sphere. People are beholden to the organizations of corporations and power. Right. A great example from the news is Boeing, I think just announced yesterday that it was moving its headquarters, formerly from Seattle to Chicago and now to the Washington DC area, because that's really what it's in the business of is influencing Congress. Exactly. So it moved from a place where it was centered on engineering, to a place where it was centered on accounting and finance, Chicago, to a place where it's going to be centered on lobbying and manipulating the political process. And that's its core business. Management perceives that as its core business. Making super high quality products. Well, think about Elon Musk, right? California said, you know, they're regulating the Tesla factories and under COVID. And among other things, pass him in the pace of taxes. He's the richest man in the world. He has a 10 potential. So I'm taking my company to Texas, you know, and where they're giving me money, they said they won't regulate me. When Amazon tried to build a place in New York, actually they had a beauty contest. It said, cities, governments all over the country, tell me what you will give me if I move my business to your place. Tell me what you will give me. One of the things he asked for was a heliport where he said he could fly his helicopter in and out. Here again, one of the richest people in the world, you know, to go back and forth between Elon and what he's asking, what are you going to give me? You know, not what I'm going to, am I going to contribute to society? And at the end of the day, he said not to move to New York because they wouldn't give him enough. And people are desperate. They need jobs. They need health care. And that becomes the promise. So our society is so distorted, so misaligned. And that alignment, the glue to that alignment is largely racial anxiety. So why are all these people who need jobs following Trump and following the right wing when from an economic perspective, it's very clear they don't reflect the economic interests. So you know, the thing that we're really focused on in this podcast and in our work, John, is the way in which in particular, neoclassical economics has both passed itself off as the basis of this set of immutable scientific ideas that are essentially expressions of laws of nature. But that if you take them seriously, the only thing that can happen is that the rich will get richer and everyone else will get poorer. That the powerful become ever more powerful and everyone else will become weaker. Come to things as simple as conceiving of the economy as a Pareto optimal equilibrium. Like if there was ever an idea that was better suited to protect the interests of the status quo, I don't know what it is. Because if it's a Pareto optimal equilibrium where any exogenous shock decreases welfare for everyone, well, then we should pretty much leave everything else alone. By definition. And, you know, I'm just so fascinated by the way in which that framework of thought intersects with your institute's thinking. You know, I oftentimes look at things it's like when something is obvious and we're not doing it or ignoring it, we have to look more deeply like I stick my hand in fire burns. I stick it back in the burns again. I stick it back. I said, really, John, what are you doing? But that, you know, it burns. Obviously I know it burns. I'm getting burned. Why are you doing it then? And I think that since our founding and, you know, frankly, W.P. Duvois talked about it. He said we traded in our democracy for basically white supremacy. And he said what many people got, many whites got was psychological wage. David Roderker wrote a book called the wages of whiteness. And do we see time and time again at different critical times in the progressive movement? And, you know, there were efforts to actually break this down many times. And what the elites were always able to do was to turn it back in part based on racial resentment and hostility. When Truman was in the White House, he proposed a universal health care plan. And the whole country was suffering from lack of health care. We had just come out of World War II. He had the votes to get it passed. And then someone asked him at the last moment, if we have universal health care, will the hospitals be integrated? Truman said yes. They turned it down. And when I say they turned it down, it was obviously Congress. But the white Americans by and large, especially in the South, supported it. We would rather go without health care than to share a hospital with a racial other. And so if you think about all the demonstrations, if you know, we hold Occupy in a band for a moment, you know, we have demonstrations about wearing face masks. We've had demonstrations about police killings. We had demonstrations about integrating neighborhoods, trying to build low income housing in the country. We had demonstrations about immigrants, five immigrants want to come to the country. We had on and on almost no demonstrations about the economy. Certainly not at a national level. We have a factory goes on strike. That's it. And then we have laws saying if there's a strike, there can't be a secondary strike. You can't really join in. I mean, so people feel the economy on one hand, but the kind of sustained movement that I mean, we just had an interaction on January 6th. People storming the Capitol. What are they asking for? Ask them that Trump stay in this president. They're asking that our democracy, which give it by democracy send away, you know. So part of the thing that's happening and we, this is what I mean, the pollute that holds this country together, that the whole this rotten deal together is racial resentment. And the racial resentment Republican party is basically almost a 50 50 party with the Democrat party. If you look at their agenda, so what's their platform for the midterms? They said they don't have one. They don't need one. What they're going to write is fear about critical race theory, fear about pedophiles, fear about immigrants coming to the country. The thing is fear and fear is not rational. Yeah, but it is the defining psychological determinant of whether you're liberal or conservative. That's right. It's threat sensitivity. It's not. It's not just I say it's not rational. It's certainly strategic. Fear has been weaponized. And so as the country sort of goes through, I mean, when you think about it, it's amazing. We just finished a presidency a few years ago, the first African American president. You know, you can think he was not, you know, he may say he's not the best president, not the worst president, but the kind of anxiety Trump and the Republican Party was able to build around, not just his presidency, his candidacy. He's not a real American. He wasn't born here. Really what they're saying is you, by the fact that you're black, don't belong. When Trump says the election was stolen, there's a subtext to it. He doesn't mean necessarily that people went to the ballot and stole the thing. He meant that black people turned out in record numbers, certainly in Georgia, is in and of itself illegitimate. And so we have over 30 states now running around the country after the attorney general that point that Trump appointed said there's no evidence of substantial voter fraud. So what do we do? We have to pass laws to end the voter file that we didn't find. What are they really saying? It's just, it's just maddening. Right. So I think that sort of putting these two things together, we need a different approach and the approach we have, I think keeps taking us back to the same place where we're stuck. So what is the different approach? I'm glad you asked that question. And part of the response to the question is that yes, we have to build a framework and a story and an analysis that actually is more complicated, more complicated in terms of what it takes into account of not more complicated in terms of how we actually convince people of it. The message has to be simple. What it's pointing to has to be more complicated, not be more specific. So yesterday I was on a panel about closing the racial wealth gap and saying that's important, but it's the wrong target by itself because what it does, it just says whites are doing okay in terms of wealth and people of color, particularly African Americans are doing very bad and implicit in that, if not explicit, that whites are the perpetrators. They're benefiting from a system in which blacks are being subjugated. But when we frame the issue in terms of the racial wealth gap, I gave the example. I said, if Jeff Bezos walks in here, he's white, then the other white person in the room is unemployed, the gap between whites and blacks will be huge, but not because the white guy standing next to me is doing so well. It's got Jeff Bezos in the room. So there's one story where we don't want to look at race at all. The other story is that we look at it in categorical terms and the population that's white is distributed and very heterogeneous. And the same is true in this population that's black. And so instead of just white and black, we have to look at the complexity, the people's lives and that complexity, be willing to say, we are concerned about all those people suffering. And no, we're not equating the suffering. We're not saying that every group suffers the same as the other group, but every group does suffer. Wherever they're suffering, we will actually deal with it, which means we do care about the white single mom in the suburbs. I mean, I had this conversation with some of the leadership of SEIU saying, she gets to show up in the story. She's a large part of your base, but you're not really talking to her. And 30 plus percent of SEIU's base supported Trump. And most of them are white. And it's like, why? Because Trump's talking to him. He's lying to him, but you're not really talking to him. You're lumping him with Elon Musk. You're lumping him with Trump. So that's the more complicated story. We have to be willing to say, okay, I can't pay my rent. He's like, yeah, but I'm homeless. Okay, we're both screwed. It's not that my not being paying my rent is a no consequence because you're homeless. And that's what we do a lot of times. We tell my story, Bob Marley's talking about every man thinks his burden is the heaviest. We don't want to hear about other people's burdens. And I think that's the complicated story we have to tell. So to be clear, when you're suppressing wages, as we have in this country for the last 40 years, you're advantaged by the fact that the people whose wages you are suppressing are people of color who have the least economic power in the society, which makes it easier and easier to suppress their wages. Right. I agree. And the thing is, some of its intentional, some of it's not. Yeah. I mean, for example, if you say, I teach at Berkeley, I have most of my students have very few black students, you know, and Berkeley is constantly saying we want more diverse student population and particularly blacks. Why don't we get them? Well, we get students when they're 18 or 22 years old, they've been through a whole system. When the when the COVID hit, we did a lot of research on COVID. We were we pushed Michigan to be the first state to disaggregate the data. And everyone was saying COVID is equal opportunity disease, said that would be unique in the history of this country, not because someone was saying, let's make COVID really attack Native Americans and blacks, but because people are situated differently, when you push things through the system, it would distribute it in different ways. So Michigan disaggregated the data and almost was shocked that the incidence of getting COVID and the incidence of getting treatment and the incident of dying at every stage, it was a huge racial gap. And from my perspective, it wasn't an intentional response. It was basically the structures in place and the structure does most of the work now. Yeah, it was the it was the inevitable outcome of the structure of the society. So so so let's talk about one of your your approaches to reality is like this, which is targeted universalism, which is a different way of thinking about policy. Explain in general, what targeted universalism is and and use that example with COVID and the disparate health outcomes, how how one might apply it towards addressing that. So the idea of targeting versus is that you have a universal goal, that's not pegged to any particular population. You say, we need a healthy society, people need certain things. Everybody needs to have good health care, everybody needs to have good schools, we want people to thrive. We want people to have in terms of the conversation I had yesterday, how much wealth does a family need to have economic security? Just you know, have economists cut up that number. And they'll say they'll say, you know, I mean, you certainly need three or four months to be able to be unemployed and to be able to survive. You certainly need to be able to, you know, the cost of school and health to get sick and pay for education. So come out with a number, whatever it is, we can come out with a number. So that's that can be in this case, be the universal. Every family should have this amount of wealth, this amount of cushion. And then you say that's the universal. How do we get families there? Which group is already there? It's likely that for the most part, no group is there. Whites are not going to be there, blacks are not going to be there, Native Americans, Asian. Point is, is that then you say, what would it take for group A to get there? That's the targeted part. Is targeted is based on how people are actually situated. You're saying people are situated in different structures and are situated in different places in relation to that universal. How do we get them there? So then the strategies become targeted based on people situatedness. And the goal is to get every group, not just the most marginal group and not the most favorite group. The goal is to get everybody to that universal, but recognizing that you're going to use different strategies to get them there. Think about something like ESL in school. We have ESL in school now, English as a second language. So students can start learning instructions in their own language and eventually switch over to English. When that case first came to the court, it literally went to the Supreme Court because the idea was no, we're going to treat everybody the same. Or think about something like the American Disability Act. The idea that someone comes to an escalator trying to get from the second floor to the third floor and they're in a wheelchair. Same response is don't treat everybody the same. And that was our concept of equality until really the 1970s to the extent that we had a concept of equality. It's like I don't see race, I don't see ethnicity, I don't see, I just see a human being. I don't see any, I don't see the person's condition. And so turning the versus and says, we actually want to address that. We sort of saw the difference, but then it used the favorite group as the target. And oftentimes, as you suggested, the favorite group or what's called the favorite group is actually not doing very well. So white men, which was the default favorite group, their income has been relatively static for 40 years. So is that what I want? Do they have what they need? No. They may still have more than what their woman counterpart have or more than their black counterpart if they're white men, but they don't have enough. So targeting the versus and takes the sort of competition over scarce resources between groups and say, we all deserve X, that's the universal. And we're in different relationship to that X. So we'll have different strategies, but not because you're white, not because you're a man, not because you're, it's because of how you're situated in relationship to these universals. It's interesting because kind of implicit in the conversation about targeted universalism is the acknowledgement that many of our existing policies aren't really outcome oriented. That's right. That's right. That's exactly right. It's very outcome oriented. It's like, you know, because we'll say, well, we gave the school an extra 5%. And what happened? You know, an educator will tell you that probably the most single most important thing in terms of schools is the teacher. And for high poverty schools, 5% is not going to hire you qualified teachers. And so even teachers, that's an input in of itself. We ought to look at the outcome. The goal is to give people that outcome. And we're agnostic about the best way to do that. I know we've gone over time, but we have a couple final questions for you, which we pose to a lot of our guests. The first is the benevolent dictator question. No economic or political constraints. What would you do? What would you prioritize? What would you do to prioritize building a more belonging and inclusion in our economy? So it's a great question. And of course, I start off with this most of the thing is a benevolent dictator. It's a contradiction. Right. We know. We know. So the thing is, you know, in America, the economist from India, he talks about this. He said, what do people need? He doesn't used to wear a belong. It's the same concept. He said, right. People need to effectively participate in their society. And I wrote a piece which I said, the first good in a society, the primary good in society, is that money is not free speech. It's not health. The first good is membership because members then decide what all the other goods are. Members set the terms of how the society operate. So having a real democracy, having this, not just in the, again, where you perform something every two or four years, but where you can actually structure society. And to your point, as you made earlier, it's outcome oriented. We want to make sure that everyone can participate, everyone, and that no participation is so extreme. I mean, if you could, I can read stuff about it. Our country was coming together. The quote unquote founders was very concerned about over concentration of power, even as powerful people. Well, we're there. Power is extremely concentrated. And so I would say the whole economy has to work for people. John Rawls talked about this in theory of justice. How do you organize an economy where the ultimate goal is not how much money you make is, you know, how do you serve the people? And if you can serve the people and make money, go for it. But if it means you can't make money and serve the people, you don't get to make money. The penultimate value is service to people. And I would even extend it to the planet and things like inherent in tax and stuff like that. I mean, I start off from a position that all wealth is commonwealth. How we divide it up is up to us. It's not up to one person, you know, no one built wealth by themselves. So how do you make wealth in service of people? And then if you see some people persistently falling behind or persistently not being service, then you target that group. You don't blame that group for not being able to do what another group does. And one final question. Why do you do this work? What else is there to do? I haven't, I haven't been sleeping the last couple of nights worried about where our country's headed. I want to go sleep. I have kids, I have grandkids. I care about people. I love people. You know, when I talk about targeting universalism and how targeting universalism and belonging is clearly about everyone. It deals with our racial past, it deals with our gender past, but it's a future where everyone counts. And people are finding that when you stretch, when you can, I mean, think about the election in Florida where they voted to change the constitution so returning citizens could vote. It got the largest single vote counted of any candidate, any issue in Florida, because it was framed in terms of this is for all of us. This is for all of us. It's not just for blacks. Yes, blacks, we disproportionately benefited. It's not just for Latinos, it's for all of us. And now people are saying as a strategy that works, and I said, great, but it's not just a strategy. I really believe everybody counts. And so belonging is about saying every human being matters. And we need to organize a society that reflects that. That's awesome. Well, John, we could talk to you for hours, but we can't. You can't. But we thank you so much for being on the show and for your work. And I hope you will join us again to explore these matters in further and deeper ways. If I may before, so I appreciate the work you're doing. And why do you do it? I'm with you. What else would you do? Yeah. What else would you do? If you can, you should work on this stuff because nobody's it's not going to take care of itself. And you know, the forces of concentrated power are like it's getting worse fast. And the world. And you know, anybody with a brain who's paying attention can see that top heavy structures topple over always. They never don't. And we're in great danger of that happening really soon. I've got a lot to take away from that conversation. Yeah, absolutely. I was really struck by the distinction he drew between inclusion and belonging. I mean, how about the party example, right? Fantastic, fantastic example of the difference between inclusion and belonging. But I mean, you know, I'm super sympathetic with the distinction he's drawing. Yeah. I mean, part of it is definitional in terms of that particular example that inclusion is kind of something that happens to you. Like you can be included. Whereas belonging is something that we do together. It is more cooperative. And I think that's an important distinction to keep in mind. It's like saying, you know, toleration, you know, like, oh, religious toleration. I tolerate you having the wrong religion. But I don't welcome it. You know, I tolerate people of different colors and races and ethnicities. But you know, I don't necessarily want to. That is very different than belonging. Can I just say there's another distinction here and he brought up a March of Sen. And a March of Sen makes a very important distinction in his capabilities approach between human capabilities and human capital. That they're not the same thing and that we often look at like, oh, you give somebody an education. That's human capital and that it gives you the capability to increase your productivity and your earnings and therefore to live a better life. And what a March of Sen points out is all that is true. Human capital is important. But a capability is broader than that because the education also gives you just a sense of accomplishing something. It gives you the ability to participate in political debates, to be more engaged in your community in ways that are non-remunerative in an economic sense. And I think we talk about economic inclusion and we do it in a very abstract technical sense of how that drives economic prosperity and growth. And we believe that it's true. It is a major driver of economic prosperity is to include more people in the economy from all different backgrounds, races, perspectives, et cetera. But I think what John is pointing out to when he makes this distinction with belonging is that belonging is something that is worthwhile, gratifying, important in and of itself absent the economic outcomes. Yeah, no, it's really true. The evil of neoclassical economics, right? The worst thing about it is it denies that inclusion even matters, right? This whole makers and takers thing, right? That there's this distinction between the good people who make things and everyone else who takes things rather than like this negative feedback loop or a decreasing return system between makers and takers rather than an increasing return system between buyers and sellers, where the more of both we have and the more deliberate we are in creating more of both, the better it will be for everybody. We're all better off when we're all better off, right? I think of it a little differently in terms of the neoclassical neoliberal approach. It's not that it doesn't say it thinks that inclusion doesn't matter. It just thinks that the invisible hand will solve that. That's right. That, you know, either take care of itself or it'll be a thing we do after we have economic growth. Right. I mean, what they argue is that racism is inefficient. Right. It's just, it's inefficient. So a racist company is going to be less efficient than a non-racist company and they'll be competed out of existence. You know, the invisible hand will solve this problem. And again, it gets to, you know, we talk about this a lot, having cause and effect reversed. Yes. That, you know, we say that, you know, a thriving middle class is the primary cause and source of growth, not the consequence of it. Well, there's a similar thing with inclusion. The other side says that inclusion will be a consequence of growth, that if we grow the economy more, you know, rising tide and all that, more people will be included in it. And our perspective is that inclusion is actually the primary cause of growth. Yeah. And indeed the economy has grown greatly over the last decade, but in many ways it has not become more inclusive. In fact, it's become more exclusive as wealth of power and capabilities have concentrated in the fewer and fewer hands. And this gets to another important point that John made when we were talking about, you know, this racial resentment that Rand report from a couple of years ago highlights this that it is absolutely true that no demographic group has seen their incomes grow more slowly over the past 40 years than white non-college educated men. Correct. That is true. They still earn more than women and non-whites, but their incomes have grown slower. John pointed this out and the Rand report points out the data. The fact that their incomes have stagnated or even shrunk is not because non-whites and women are doing better. It's because they have lost income to other white men. Yeah. At the very top. Exactly. In the top 1%, in the top 0.1%. But it is just psychologically hard to mobilize people to confront a part of the in-group. It is hard to whip white non-college educated men up into a frenzy against Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos, whom they worship. Right. And this gets to the full name of John's Institute. It's not the Belonging Institute. It's the Othering and Belonging Institute. And what we have seen over the past few decades, and particularly in the era of Trump, is that emphasis on Othering. Yeah. Well, it was a fantastic conversation and we were really privileged to get to talk to John and hopefully we'll get to talk to him and his team more in the future. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.