 Hi, I'm Ashley, one of the producers here at Pitchfork Economics. We all loved Nick and Goldie's interview with Nancy McLean so much that we wanted you to hear what didn't make it into Tuesday's episode. So today's bonus is their full, unedited conversation, and we hope you like it. Hello. Hi, Nancy, it's Nick Hanauer. Hi, Nick, great to be with you. Thank you for doing it. And this is Goldie. Yeah, he's the Ed McMahon of Pitchfork Economics. Got it. I mean, not Nick. Thank you so much for taking the time to be with us today. We're obviously- Delighted to. Yeah, huge fans of your work. I like to think of myself as the James Buchanan of- I'm glad somebody's doing long-term thinking. So the great challenge for this conversation is where to start and where to end because we have so much to talk about. We know one place to start and that's to get your slate. So if you could just state your name, tell us who you are, plug your book, whatever you want to do. Okay. I'm Nancy McLean. I teach history and public policy at Duke University, and I am the author most recently of Democracy and Change, The Deep History of the Radical Rights Stealth Plan for America. So first of all, we want to cover both your thoughts and thinking on social movements, both in history and today. But we also want to connect that to your book. And Goldie and I had a big laugh because we have been deriding Buchanan for a long time. He's been a butt of a joke in this office because we work a lot on the minimum wage. We work a lot on the minimum wage. The $15 minimum wage has been a focus out of this office. And there's this quote from him we like to abuse where he- Oh, the one where he called the economist who supported it, Camp Following Hoards. Camp Following Hoards. But the idea that just as no physicist would claim that water runs uphill, no self-respecting economist would claim that increases in the minimum wage increase employment. So we've been poking fun at that for years. And then I read your book and oh my God, we thought he was a clown. We didn't know he was an evil clown. We had no idea. Yeah, we thought, yeah, he turns out to have been an evil clown, not just a clown. The quote interests us a lot because the main body of our work is tearing down neoliberalism as a meaning system, as a system of thought. And the most pernicious part of the neoliberal meaning system is the claim that this is all like laws of nature, that these are inescapable and unavoidable facts of life and so on and so forth. And that quote by Buchanan is like one of the canonical examples of that, like he literally invokes physics, which is so interesting. But anyway, tell us a little bit, just tell our listeners a little bit about your book. Let's start with that. So my book started out in a very different direction than the way it ended up, which sometimes happens with historians, but they usually don't go as far afield as mine did. I was looking at the state of Virginia's reaction to the Brown versus Board of Education decision, particularly the policy of massive resistance that required the governor to shut any public schools that were going to desegregate, which they did in several Virginia communities. And as I started looking into that, I found that the economist Milton Friedman, another founding neoliberal thinker, had actually issued his first manifesto for tax funded school vouchers for private schools in 1955 in the full knowledge of how it will be used by Southern segregationists. So I thought, well, here's an interesting story about neoliberalism where nobody has found it before, and put it in the South in the reaction to the Civil Rights Movement and desegregation. So I was following that story when Buchanan kind of appeared in my peripheral vision. And to make a long story short, he just kept appearing in other places in designing the Chilean Constitution, advising on the Pinochet Constitution that has led to huge demonstrations in the streets this past year, many people being killed and actually blinded by security forces as they try to get rid of this Constitution that has so bound their democracy. And then I moved to North Carolina in 2010, just after a radicalized Republican Party swept both houses of the General Assembly for the first time since Reconstruction. And it's a very different Republican Party. It was dominated by Tea Party figures funded by the Kochs and a local cousin, people call him Art Pope. Anyway, I saw this new legislature enacting measures that were straight out of the Buchanan playbook. So I started to shift my vision to Buchanan. And when I was able to get into his private archive when he died in 2013, that really confirmed my belief that Buchanan's ideas have been weaponized by the Koch donor network to undermine the model of 20th century government in the US. And we can pick that apart in any way you want to. Right. And to be clear, central to our thesis is that rising economic inequality undermines democracy. But your book, you point out that undermining democracy was exactly the point. Yes, I think that is crucial to appreciate that distinction. And I'm so glad that you raised that because there is an emerging sense among scholars across disciplines, economists, sociologists, political scientists, historians, that the levels of inequality that we have now in the United States are absolutely a threat to democracy for reasons that you've talked about and we could talk more about. But what I found that was so interesting and terrifying in a way was that this anti-democratic ideology among libertarians is actually pretty systematic and deep and thorough going. And what Charles Koch found in the ideas of James Buchanan was something he'd never had before, which is a strategy to impose a minority agenda. And the teeny tiny majority of the whole population, the really hardcore ones, but a strategy to impose that ideology on the vast majority in the full knowledge that if people understood that this was happening, they would act and try to stop it. So that is, and that's hence the title of my book too, Democracy in Chains, because, and that was actually a language that Buchanan himself used, this language of enchaining and speaking of the demos needing to be enchained. And that was because for a hardcore libertarian like James Buchanan or Charles Koch, democratic government is necessarily a problem because it leads the majority to infringe on the purported rights of the minority of extremely wealthy people and corporations who don't like doing what the rest of their fellow citizens believe needs to be done. So what Koch got from Buchanan was a strategy for how to reverse that through incremental changes in the rules that most people wouldn't even notice until it was too late. So again, not anything like I had ever come across before as a historian of the United States or a specialist in the history of social movements, this is really, I think of it as the antisocial movement, social movements. They would like to take away the very conditions and capabilities that have enabled social movements to succeed in the past. Charles Koch boasted to a donor summit last year that he said, we have made more progress together in the past five years than I've been able to achieve in the previous 50. So that statement tells us a few things. One, how long he's been at this project. Two, that it's lately stunningly successful. The reason for that is Buchanan's ideas, but also the Trump administration. Contrary to what the pundits say, the Trump administration is moving through large parts of the Koch agenda while we are all obsessed with the figure of the president himself. Absolutely. So can you give us some examples of the kind of rule changes that they were after and that they enacted? Yes. Well, and they've already done a lot of this in the States, particularly since the 2010 midterms that had such low turnout on the progressive and democratic side. So, and again, my state, North Carolina is a Petri dish for this. It is one of their prime laboratories. And where I went to graduate school, the University of Wisconsin, Wisconsin was similarly a laboratory. So we could start with Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, who under the misleading guise of a budget repair bill took away collective bargaining rights from public sector workers that they'd enjoyed for half a century. That was an example of a radical rules change. And even within that law, there were all kinds of smaller pieces, stipulations to ensure that it weakened unions as much as possible. That would be one example. So the spate of laws in States dominated by this Koch-baked, Koch-transformed Republican party to suppress voting. So there's been a significant focus and understandable on the way that they have aimed at African-American voters because that's legally actionable in the courts. But they have also aimed at young voters who are much more likely to want action on the climate, to support more progressive measures, attempts to deal with inequality, et cetera. So voter suppression has been another piece. The most radical and sophisticated gerrymandering we've ever seen in our political history to make it so that these Republican legislators are choosing their voters rather than letting voters choose their representatives. And in some States, the impact is absolutely breathtaking. So for example, in the 2018 midterms, Democrats in my state, North Carolina, won 50.2% of the vote and they ended up with, what was it, two seats versus nine on the Republican side. So the drawing of district lines has just been astonishing in its deliberate effort to under-represent voters they know would object to this agenda and try to block it and to over-represent those on whom they feel they can rely. So those are some measures. There's also a lot of other stuff going through the courts and the efforts to change the legal thinking and the judiciary, but at every step, sharply focused attention to changing the rules. Right. And to be clear, the voter suppression and the gerrymandering, it's not just a partisan tactic in terms of just Republicans versus Democrats, you point out it's ideological. They actually want less democracy. It's not just less Democrats. They're going for less democracy. They think democracy is dangerous. Yeah, I really appreciate your bringing that up because I think that part of our challenge in understanding what we're really up against in this country is the persistence of older terms that actually block our vision from what's happening. So the notion that this is partisan, that this is just Republicans versus Democrats or vice versa, or that this is a battle between liberals and conservatives, both of those frameworks mislead the first one because this is no longer my father's Republican party one could say this is a party that has been absolutely transformed by the strategic changes to the rules and the incentives practiced by these arch right donors. And I'll give you just one example of that. Charles, the Coke Industries itself and many of the other donors are based in the fossil fuel industry and they are desperate to stop action on the climate, which their libertarian dogma also deems inappropriate. Well by using the power of donors to punish any Republican who didn't toe the line with a primary challenge from the right and the funding of candidates who did deliver for the donors, they were able to make it such by 2014 that only eight of 278 Republicans in Congress would admit that climate change is caused by human activity. And that is a radical transformation of a party that was not much different from Democrats in the early 90s in its recognition of the science. So I mean, it's almost like invasion of the body snatchers or something, what they've managed to do to the Republican party. So that's not really a party anymore in the sense of traditional American major parties that were, you know, coalitions representing different interests. This Republican party now has an almost Leninist discipline and that is by design from the way the donors have rerigged the punishments and the incentives. So just as that, you know, looking at this in terms of partisanship doesn't help, neither does looking at it in terms of liberals versus conservatives. These are the least conservative people one could imagine. They are radicals of the right and actually many Republicans who have been attacked by them have realized that. So I actually start the book with some quotations from people including Orrin Hatch who said when he was primaried by these people, he said, these people aren't Republicans. They're not conservatives. These people are radical libertarians. I despise these people. Those are pretty much the exact words. And yet a few years later, it was Orrin Hatch who denied President Obama the ability even to get a hearing for his Supreme Court justice because he was so brought to heel by this coke donor network. So I think that is an indication that we really need to shake up our thinking and recognize that something we have never known before is underway and it's really important to understand it, to get ahead of it and to publicize it so that people know what they are dealing with. And as for a historian, is there any historical parallel to what we're seeing right now? Not really. Not in this level. I mean, what you have here is it's not the whole capitalist class. It is a fraction thereof, but a significant and extremely wealthy fraction. One journalist, George Mambio at the Guardian, calculated that if the fortunes of Charles Koch and his recently deceased brother David Koch were combined, they would be the richest man in the world. So lots of wealth and Koch has convened over 600 other donors who give large amounts. But basically, it is a deeply ideological, well-funded, highly strategic, integrated long game to transform our society. And we just don't have anything else like that in our history. Someone could point to, say, the election of 1896 and the way that corporations rallied under the leadership of the Republican Mark Hanna. They put in crazy amounts of money to defeat William Jennings Bryan and a kind of reform-minded Democratic Party. But even that is not like this, because this effort by the Kochs also involves quite literally hundreds of separate organizations, ostensibly separate, like the Heritage Foundation, the Cato Institute, the American Legislative Exchange Council, ALEC, the Federalist Society. I could go on, lots of organizations, and they're moving the same plan down the road in a kind of elaborate division of labor. I mean, I wish there was more coordination like this on the progressive side in order to counter this, but we've just never seen that kind of tight coordination before. Yeah, so interesting. Nor, if I may say, to the systematic disinformation, like this whole enterprise relies on disinformation, whether it is climate science denial or the support that Koch network organizations provided to the tobacco industry, when it was facing challenge to the support of Fox News and efforts like that that kind of poisoned public discourse. It is a kind of a wraparound enterprise that is, I think, really toxic to democracy. Come on, Nick. Get a couple more zeros onto your net wealth and fight back. What's interesting is that at the end of the day- Well, then if I may say, I so appreciate your voice, Nick, in speaking out, in trying to bring other people of wealth to the understanding that this is creating an utterly unsustainable society. And we have got to get ahead of this if we want to have a society that can literally survive in terms of the impending climate catastrophe, but that also provides enough hope for people to believe it's worth continuing in their jobs and in their lives. Right, for sure. So you invoked Lenin. Explain that. That was actually a really kind of shocking and weirdly kind of fun discovery of this research was that one of Charles Koch's grantees, intellectual, that he patronized significantly in the late sixties and early seventies, a guy named Murray Rothbard, actually, and he had come from a family, a Jewish family around New York. He's an intellectual polymath, read everything, and he had read Lenin. There was a famous weekend in Vaya when Charles Koch invited Murray Rothbard to Vail, Colorado, and part of the discussion was Murray Rothbard telling Koch he really needed to read Lenin in order to understand the necessity of developing a kind of revolutionary cadre of libertarians who would be able to do things like entering much larger formations. Here, you could thank the Republican Party, that's what we've seen, with a small disciplined minority that would not compromise, that was extremely clear about what they wanted, and that would use every opportunity in order to make the case for their kind of revolutionary program. But again, here, the revolution is a kind of capitalist, an arch-capitalist revolution instead of something like the Bolshevik communist revolution. But it is funny, too, in one of his books, I believe it's Good Prophet, Charles Koch actually cites Lenin among various thinkers that he's learned from, so he kind of confirms the point. So tell us a little bit more about your work on social movements and what you learned from the sort of conservative anti-social movement and how it informs your perspective on others. Sure. Well, all the books that I've written have involved social movements in some way, and at some point I realized that, and then began teaching about the history of social movements, beginning with the American Revolution and working forward. And it is not common in that field to also look at social movements of the right, but I think it's essential to do because they face the same challenges as other social movements in terms of identifying grievances that will move people to action, framing their arguments, either finding patrons or funding of some kind to keep going, using the media, et cetera, et cetera. So prior to this book, I had looked at, it feels kind of bizarre now to call it mainstream movement conservatism, since some of it was so off the charts, but I'm referring to the kind of movement conservatism that came together around the National Review Magazine and William F. Buckley in the 1950s and the Barry Goldwater Canacy, et cetera. And all of that fed into this larger change that we're seeing now, but in the most recent book, Democracy and Chains, I kind of pulled out the particular thread having to do with libertarianism, organized libertarianism, which at this point, whatever it once was, has been dominated by and weaponized by Charles Koch, who provides funding for virtually every libertarian entity in existence, except ironically, the Libertarian Party, because he doesn't think that it has much value, except insofar as it might bring young recruits. So obviously, Nick isn't rich enough to take on the Koch brothers, and there really doesn't seem to be anybody on the left willing to spend money that way over a 50-year period. So we can't follow the plan that the Kochs and Buchanan followed, but I'm wondering if there's any lessons from this movement or other conservative movements that we can learn in terms of fighting back against this. Yeah, I think there are definitely lessons that we can learn. One of them is the need for a long view, which has been, pardon me, but in short supply on the progressive side for some time now, it was once the case of the early 20th century, at mid-century, etc., where progressives were thinking long-term, where they were thinking decades ahead, and what would happen in a generation or two. That is no longer the case, by and large. So thinking long-term is crucial. Also getting out of the silos is crucial. There's been great work done in various spaces of progressive politics, whether it's environmental politics or dealing with economic inequality in different ways, or anti-racism, or feminism, etc., but our problem now is that there's not enough connection between all of these domains, and even within them, groups are fragmented and pitted into competition against one another by funders, and so it's a real problem. So those are some of the problems we face. I would say, though, I believe the single most important finding of my book is to see Charles Koch, James Buchanan, and their ilk saying again and again that they recognize that they are a permanent minority, that nobody wants the program they are trying to impose. And that is why they turned to stealth. They turned to stealth for the first time, as near as I can tell, with Social Security in the early 1980s, seeing that it had just an almost universal failings of support. Buchanan came up with a scheme to try to undermine that by misleading the public, by divide and conquer, members of the coalition, etc. So that's just one example, but I think if we pay attention to what is driving this on their side and focus in on that, we can help people understand what a tiny minority cause this is, in fact, when it's actually telling the truth about what it seeks, we can expose that. We can help people understand the stealth measures that it's used and how it is rigging the rules in order to move through its program without having to argue openly for it. And we can take advantage of the fact that there is a huge majority that this libertarian right is afraid of. It is in a sense a kind of dormant minority because people don't know how much they've been targeted by this libertarian right. But I do think that when people come together across these various differences of ideas, of democracy, of regional the country, etc., and rally to stop this and to renew democracy, that could be an incredibly powerful and transformative force. So that's what I've been trying to encourage in my, I've done a lot of speaking since the book came out around the country and worked with groups of all kinds. And I will say that's an exciting thing too, that everybody now realizes we are at an all hands on deck emergency moment for the future of democracy in this country. And so people are trying to make bridges across the silos and work together to make structural democracy reform a top agenda item wherever progressives get power. So that I think is exciting. And there's people, for example, like Annie Leonard, the head of Greenpeace, you know, is saying we realize we're never going to get a healthy environment unless we have a healthy democracy. Or we're at Planned Parenthood, they're saying we realize we can't protect women's health and their reproductive rights unless we have a healthy democracy within labor circles, people realizing the same thing. So I'm encouraged by all that. But you know, I think it's going to take a lot more organizing and a lot more support and a lot more public education to make sure we make the most of that potential. And in fact, on a hopeful note, one of the ironies in your book is that Buchanan got his start focusing on trying to impose his ideological agenda in Virginia. And recently, the state of Virginia has completely flipped politically to the Democratic side. Yes. And interestingly, that the big flip came in a single cycle. So Virginia has always been, you know, by design by the planter elite that, you know, crafted the rules that govern the state. Very anti-democratic, you know, efforts to minimize the popular control of government. One aspect of that is off-cycle elections, you know, so they're not coordinated with national ones. So this was an off-cycle election. But in Virginia, mobilized Democrats closed that gap from I believe it was 66, what was it? 66, 34, I believe was the division in the House of Delegates. In a single cycle, they mobilized and closed that to 50-50. So that is just stunning and shows what can be done. And since that's happened, they've done all kinds of things that have benefited the population and that contribute to democracy reform. So another irony in this, I think, is Donald Trump being in the White House has been so devastating and so destructive in so many ways. But it's also the case that he really woke a lot of people up. And that is what drove that mobilization in Virginia was particularly not only but the new, you know, the newly mobilized tended to be women and white women who realized, you know, who were progressive, who realized what have we been doing? We have got to become active. And when you added that effort to people of color and labor unions and others who had been long in the trenches, it really proved transformative. So I think that's also an example of how by cultivating new alliances, by agreeing on some common purposes, really potentially transformative change can be won. Can I ask, this is going to sound like just the dumbest question ever, but until you… It'll probably be the best, but go ahead. Raised it. It just really never occurred to me to think of it in these terms. Was the American Revolution a movement of the right or the left? That's great. And that's one reason I start with it, you know, in my class on the history of social movements because, you know, in some ways it could be said to be both. I mean, absolutely there was a popular mobilization that involved, you know, country farmers and urban artisans and others who had been governing themselves, who saw that capacity being taken away by the British crown, who wanted to change it and who were radicalized by their experience. So for example, some New England states ended up adopting measures against slavery after the revolution. And that's, you know, just one index of the kind of radicalism of the revolution. But it's also the case that elites in the country were very much afraid of the rising tide of abolitionist sentiment in Britain and also many, not just planters, but also farmers who were in kind of the Western hinterlands really wanted to take Indian land and the British crown was standing in their way. No, you know, they want to fight these wars for you anymore. So the American Revolution, I think like any revolution was a very complicated phenomenon that had but there was a significant radicalism to it. And I think you see that in the Declaration of Independence or the writings of Thomas Paine, but then you also see the Constitution as being an effort to kind of get all that in check and channel popular sentiment and kind of contain, if you will, the radicalism of the revolution and scholars of the revolution and the Constitution do seem to agree about that. You know, they may disagree whether they think it was a good idea or a bad idea, but they do see the Constitution as in some ways a conservative document trying to contain what had been unleashed by the revolution itself. Like much of American history, an incredibly immoral compromise. But I will say too, you know, as long as we're talking about history and deep history, I'm often asked by audiences when I speak about this challenge that we're facing from the radical corporate right led by the Kochs, you know, it seems so daunting. It seems so systematic. It's so integrated. And sometimes, you know, people can feel overwhelmed by that. But you know, my answer is you think you've got a challenge? Go back and look at the abolition movement. You know, they had 33 people in a room when they brought together the American slavery, anti-slavery society. You know, there were enslaved African Americans who fled their conditions, who knew that they were not chattel, that they were human beings. And there were some radical white religious figures who agreed with them and thought slavery was a sin and a curse and a blight on the nation. But all the established institutions of our society were against them. Higher education, the mainstream churches, the courts, the papers, everything. And yet somehow, they managed to transform the consciousness of the country so much that now it's almost impossible to explain to young people how it was that anyone ever believed they could hold another group in slavery as was done in this country. So I tend to think of knowing history and particularly the history of social movements as being a very empowering resource and one that can be incredibly inspiring too in challenging times like this. Because you realize that, you know, people in the past faced in some ways much more seemingly insurmountable challenges. And yet, and again, I think this is why the fact that we're talking about a majority being threatened by a tiny minority, I think that we will, I hope, find ways to break through, to transform the public conversation, and to renew democracy in the ways that we've known it needed to be renewed and reformed for, you know, almost 50 years now on our side too. Which social movements do you find most promising today? Well, that's interesting. Well, I think there's exciting things going on in many different domains and, you know, some scholars and younger generation people, you know, use the language of intersectionality to get at that, but meaning that this breaking through of silos, right, and connecting people with different features of their identities. But I think that's happening in some really significant ways in the environmental movement and particularly among the young people who are focusing on the impending climate catastrophe. And I think that, you know, what I see is an environmental movement that's been significantly transformed by environmental justice fights, which featured, you know, people of lesser means, often people of color, communities of color that were being devastated by pollution and, you know, misuse of different kinds. And as that understanding has spread through the movement, I think it led to the development of concepts like the Green New Deal to realize that, you know, if we do want to protect our planet, we've also got to do it in a way that speaks to the very pressing needs and concerns of ordinary citizens for good jobs, for economic security, for sustainable communities. And so I'd say that's I kind of think that has the greatest potential to unite people across different domains at this point. It's fascinating. But I'm open to other arguments. Yeah. I mean, another case I make to students in classes is, you know, just looking at the lesbian and gay movement. I mean, you know, in 1955, when groups first started forming to address this, they were so embattled and they were so defensive and they were so tiny in the numbers they involved. And none of them ever could have predicted that, you know, at this point, that marriage equality would be almost ho-hum, right? That the Supreme Court would have supported it, that most people support it, that the dialogue has just so dramatically changed. So again, I think that we need to think big, to dream big, but always in connection with where people are now, people who are in motion and what they are willing to take up and work for. And when that happens, things that would have seemed impossible do happen and they've happened regularly in history. So we have one final question for you. Okay. Why do you do the work you do? I love that. I guess my flip answer is because I can't imagine doing anything else, you know, just being who I am and knowing what I know and feeling as strongly as I do about these things. But I will also say, and this might be for listeners who have not gotten involved in things yet, but who are disturbed by what they see happening in the country, in the world. People forget to mention this often, I think, but being civically active is incredibly rewarding. You know, you meet other people who share your values, who share your commitments. There's this kind of a sprit de corps to it, a pawn, a camaraderie, and it is the best, you know, not anti-depressant that doesn't come over the counter in a jar to be with people who are good people who are trying to make the world better. And you know, again, who share some of your ideas and values, but they always stretch you and challenge you. And there's a lot of joy actually along the way in that camaraderie. So I'd say that's what keeps me going. Yeah, I could not agree with you more. Civic participation, social change, it's fun, especially when you win. Yeah, absolutely. Well, Nancy, thank you so much for taking the time to chat with us. And thanks for your work. What's the next book? Can you tell us? We're not unveiling yet. Okay, okay. You could tell us, but then you'd have to kill us. Okay, that's fine. Thank you, Nick and Goldie. This has been an absolute pleasure. Thank you for your show too. It's really terrific. Okay. Bye-bye. Thank you. Bye. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.