 How do we organize human societies to maximize the good stuff and minimize the bad stuff? We have to go back to the simple insight that what you assume in each other is what you get out of each other. If you believe that most people are fundamentally selfish, then you'll start designing your whole society around that idea. If we tell this story that you can't trust anybody, that increases transaction costs in society. The more trusting people are, the lower the cost of running that economy and the better off everybody is. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, where we explore everything you wished you'd learned in Econ 101. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. So Goldie, you know, one of the things that I think is just so wrong about neoclassical economics, and we've talked about this a million times, is the behavior model Homo economicus, which asserts that people are perfectly, reliably selfish, and that, you know, we can base all our thinking and our models on that. And the fundamental problem with that isn't that it's just descriptive, it's also prescriptive, in the sense that if you teach people that people are fundamentally selfish, and then they look around the world at all of the prosperity in it, then they must conclude that selfishness is the cause of prosperity, and the more selfish we are, the more prosperity we create. And that view has radically affected our culture and our policy and our politics, and is at the core of all a lot of the neoliberal stuff that we hate the most. Right, anything goes, Nick. You know, it's the invisible hand. It is, it is. And then our friend, the Dutch historian Rutger Bregman, who thinks in ways very similar to us, is out with a really cool new book called Humankind, that basically explores this myth that people are reliably selfish, and he makes this really cool new argument that, in fact, that's not true, that people are actually are reliably pretty great, and that left to their own devices, we actually won't all just kill one another, we'll actually kind of pull together and do fine things. And he makes a really interesting subsidiary point that we harm ourselves and our capacity to work together by teaching people that we are selfish, right? And it's a, you know, it's sort of a negative feedback loop. It'll be a really interesting discussion. Let's get straight to talking with Rutger. My name is Rutger Bregman. I am a Dutch historian and the author of the new book called Humankind, A Hopeful History. Well, thanks for joining us. Yeah, thanks for having me again. Give us in a few words the basic thesis of your new book. Well, in a few words, it would be something like, deep down, most people are pretty decent. That's it. And this is an insight that may sound like, oh, well, this guy has written a book about the power of kindness. Well, that's nice and wonderful, but also quite, you know, it's not really a threat to anyone, but actually it's a really subversive idea if you really think it through, because throughout history, a more cynical view of human nature has been used by those in power to legitimize power differences in hierarchy. And if you say that people are actually, well, maybe not angels. I mean, we're not fundamentally good, clearly we're not, but that we are inclined to cooperate and that we can actually trust each other. Yeah. Then the question is, why do we still need all these CEOs and managers and kings and princes and princesses and you name it, maybe we don't need them anymore. So it's a really, really subversive idea. So, you know, on our podcast, we have spent a lot of time basically destroying the idea of homo economicus. Rucker, you've actually coined a new term to describe the human species. Homo puppy. Explain. Yeah. Yeah. I'll hope I'll be remembered for that by history and that I'll go down in the annals of science. But, you know, my expectations are not high. Now, the reason why I talk about this whole concept of homo puppy is that because there's this new fascinating theory in evolutionary anthropology and biology, which is called self domestication. Now, we all know what domestication is, right? Domestication is this process where you turn wolves into chihuahuas or, you know, you've got dogs or pigs or cows, etc. And they've been selected for centuries for friendliness and for tameness. Now, we've also long known that if you domesticate animals, then certain things start to happen. You see a list of traits that arise. So, for example, these these animals get thinner bones, smaller brains. They got like droopy floppy ears. And most interestingly, they just start to look friendlier and more puppyish. You get it's like this popification of animals. And then if you look at this list and also at the genes there that are associated with domestication. And then you look at us at human beings, you arrive at this fascinating insight that actually we look like we've been domesticated. Now, the question is obviously who has domesticated us? And the answer is we did it ourselves. Another way to describe this is to say that there's been this process of survival of the friendliest, which means that for millennia, it was actually the friendliest among us who had the most kids and so had the biggest chance of passing on their genes to the next generation. Because if you wanted to survive in the Ice Age, you know, you could collect possessions, but that was not what's going to save you. You needed friends. You needed to collect friends to be able to rely on. And yeah, so that's that's the new theory from biology. And we've got very powerful evidence for it. If you look at skeletons, for example, of 50, 40, 30, 20, 10,000 years ago, you really see this process that we yeah, it's the purification of humanity. You know, there's a parallel thought that we've been developing and it's consilient with the other point of your book, which is that if you teach people that people are selfish and horrible, they will become more selfish and horrible. Yes, correct. Right. If you if you take an economics course, you will become more selfish and horrible. Yeah, yeah, literally, literally, there's this wonderful evidence. Robert Frank, the economist, did these studies where he literally found that, you know, as students progress in their studies and, you know, if they study standard neoliberal or neoclassical, whatever you want to call it economics, they become more selfish in in these these experiments. They start behaving like or sort of these theories create the kind of people that they presuppose. That's right. And, you know, the parallel argument that we have been developing is and again, there's a ton of evidence for it that if you embed the idea in human societies, that people are fundamentally selfish and then they look around the world at all of the prosperity in it, they cannot but conclude that selfishness is the cause of prosperity. And the more selfish we are, the more prosperity we create. And there you have neoliberalism. Yeah, right. And that this creates a feedback loop of terrible behavior, which is highly corrosive, both the prosperity, but also to human societies. Yes. And that on the contrary, if you understand, as science now shows, that people actually are fundamentally good, that we have evolved over millions of years to be cooperators. It's our only superpower, really, then then it's cooperation and kindness that are the cause, the source of prosperity and stability in human lives. And that is a super subversive idea. Yeah, ideas are never merely ideas. Stories are never merely stories. We humans, we tend to become the stories that we tell ourselves. And this was also the fundamental mistake that an economist like Milton Friedman made. In the 50s, he wrote a very influential essay where he said, you know, we shouldn't judge economists on, you know, whether their theories are when we look at their theoretical assumptions, we just should look at the results. Right. So if I have a certain theory and then it turns out that in reality, my predictions, you know, come to pass, then, you know, then probably the theory was right. But what he forgot there is that if you start believing in something, then it can actually become true. So if you believe that most people are fundamentally selfish, as the neoliberals do, then you'll start designing your whole society around that idea, your schools, your workplaces, the way your democracy is organized, even your prisons. And at least for us. Yeah, exactly. And it becomes this self-fulfilling prophecy. And this is something that's been happening in Western history for centuries. And economics is simply a set of stories and ideas. It's not like physics. Yeah. Right. Where four sequels mass times acceleration, no matter what you want to believe. One of the things that got you to write this book, which I found just absolutely fascinating, was your discovery of the real Lord of the Flies. Right. Tell us that story. Well, a big part of the book is about debunking veneer theory. Veneer theory, it's a concept from Frans de Waal, the great primatologist. And he uses this to describe an old idea in Western culture, which says that civilization is only a very thin veneer, a thin layer, and that just below the surface, there's a Nazi in each and every one of us. There's a monster or a savage, right? That deep down, we're just selfish. And it's only like something small that needs to happen, a small change in our circumstances. And we quickly reveal who we really are. And this idea has been so deeply embedded in our science, in our literature, in our music. You just find it everywhere. And one of the most famous expressions, I think, of veneer theory in the 20th century has been the novel Lord of the Flies, written by William Golding, published in 1954. It's a story about a group of kids that end up on an uninhabited island. And even though, you know, they're from a really good British boarding school, they're very well behaved. And there's there seems to be nothing wrong with them. They quickly turn into savages. And at the end of the novel, three of the kids are dead. And the message basically is freedom is dangerous. People can't handle it. Here you have these very innocent kids and they very quickly turn into monsters. So this is this is where evil comes from. It's just below the surface. Now, for the book, I was interested in the very simple question, whether it had ever happened. You know, is there one case in all of world history where real kids shipwrecked on a real island? And well, maybe we can see what what really happened. And yeah, it turns out after a couple of months of research, I did actually manage to find one case in 1965 near Tonga, which is an island group in the Pacific Ocean. Six kids shipwrecked on a small island called Ata. And they were also part of a British boarding school or an Anglican boarding school. Sorry, I should say. And they were bored. They didn't like the school meals. They said, you know, we're going to go on an adventure. But already in the first night that they went on the sea, they ended up in a storm, drifted for eight days, shipwrecked and survived for 50 months on this on this lonely island for 15 months. Pretty extraordinary. And how did they survive? Well, by staying friends. So, yeah, sometimes they did end up in fights. But then one will go to one side of the island. The other will go to the other side of the island. They will cool off a little bit, come back and say sorry. They worked in teams to to cook to to tend to the garden to to be on the lookout. At one point, one of the boys even broke a leg. Well, they healed that with traditional medicine. It's just this extraordinary story that in every single way is the opposite of the fictional lot of the flies. Now, I'm not saying that this is a scientific experiment. It's obviously not. But I am saying that if millions of kids around the globe still have to read the novel, maybe we should also tell them about the one time that we know of that actual kids, real kids, really shipwrecked on a island because something completely different happened. I think one of the most important stories that I try to tell here in the book is is about the Stanford Prison Experiment, right? Because this is another, I think another example of a near theory. This was in the early 70s. Philip Simbardo, the most important living psychologist right now, he's just extraordinarily famous. He talks to crowds of like, I don't know, five, six, six thousand people whenever he's invited. And his Stanford Prison Experiment ended up in all the textbooks of all the psychology students around the globe. I just basically everyone knows it. It goes viral every now and then. There have been multiple documentaries about it. It's this, yeah, super viral thing. And I used to believe in it as well. I really did. I've written books that luckily have not been translated into English, where I again, you know, talked about the Stanford Prison Experiment for those who don't know. Maybe this is not necessary, but let me do it anyway. So Stanford Prison Experiment, you have 24 students. Again, you know, very nice kids. Some of them call themselves pacifists. They're clearly these liberal hippies. They sign up for an experiment at Stanford University. And what Philip Simbardo says is, OK, 12 of you are going to be guards. 12 are going to be prisoners. I'm going to put you in this fake in this fake prison in the basement of Stanford University. And the guards will have uniforms and they'll have the power to do whatever they want. The standard story says that very quickly, these guards turn into monsters. You know, they started behaving in a very nasty, sadistic way. The experiment had to be canceled after what is it, six days. This story, you know, became incredibly famous, like all the newspapers around the globe reported on it. And it's been used so many times for by so many people to explain basically human evil in the world. Well, look at the Stanford Prison Experiment that we say. What we now know, actually, because the archives have recently opened up, is that the whole experiment and I really don't think there's another way to put this. The experiment is a hoax. It's really is a hoax. So we now know that Philip Simbardo specifically instructed his students to behave as nasty and sadistic as possible. That many of those students said that they didn't want to do that, that they said, you know, we can just play cards or make music together and have a good time. Then Simbardo said, no, no, no, you don't understand. I need these results for the study, because then we can go to the press and say, look, prisons are horrible environments. We need to reform the whole thing. And come on, you're a liberal hippie. You want to help me with this? And so then some went along and then very quickly after the experiment, Simbardo went to the press and it became this huge thing. But for 50 years, we've been telling this like I asked a French researcher who's to ballot actually who's done really the most important work here. He's written a book called The History of a Lie. It's only available in French, but he's really the one who's done the important work. And I asked him, you know, is there still something we can learn from the Stanford Prison Experiment? And he said, yes, I think we can. It's a pretty perfect summary of everything that can go wrong in science. So there you go. It's also, by the way, I think the the best example of the thesis in your book, because he actually wanted to reform prisons and he chose to do it by attempting to prove the conventional story that we're horrible, cruel, violent, vicious animals. When in fact you could have gone the other way and tried to prove that no, no, we're more like homo puppy and that our prison system goes entirely against our nature. Yeah, this was a really interesting moment in US history. You know, at the time there were experiments with really extraordinary prisons like they have in Norway right now. I talk about that in the book. So in Norway, you have these prisons where the guards socialize with the prisoners. They often don't even wear uniforms and the prisoners have the freedom to make music, have a good time together. They take care of their own community. They have their own music label, which is called criminal records. It's really pretty bizarre if you if you first heard about it. But then you look at the results, the statistics and turns out that Norway has the most effective criminal justice system in the whole world. Lowest recidivism rate, lowest chance that someone will come in another crime once he or she gets out of prison. And then you look at the history of this idea. And actually, it starts in the US. So it was in the US that the first experiments with these kind of prisons were done. But what happened is that there was a group of liberals or maybe I should say radical leftists who were sort of completely against prisons at all. They basically wanted to abolish the whole prison system because they thought that there were inherently nasty corrupting places. And there was also this researcher called Robert Martinson, who read this big report or was one of the co-authors. It's called the Martinson report, you know, twelve hundred pages of research. But he wrote a short summary that was called What Works? And his answer was, well, nothing works. Prisons just don't work. You can't reform criminals. You just can't do it. So let's just abolish the whole thing. And then what happened was it was a very dark irony. Conservatives took over that argument. So conservatives said, yes, indeed, nothing works. So let's just lock them up and throw away the key. And so basically the road for the very harsh environment, the very terrible criminal justice system that was created in the 80s after Reagan had, you know, rose to power, sort of the road was paved by these radical leftists like Philip Simbardo and Robert Martinson. It's I think it's a fascinating history, a little bit similar, by the way, to the the history of universal basic income that was also almost implemented in the United States at the beginning of the 70s. But then it went in a very different direction as a historian. I'm always fascinated by these stories because there are so many, I don't know, weird things and surprises and things that don't turn out to be the way you expect them to. Well, America has a long and rich history of failed prison reform experiments, starting with the Quakers and the Eastern State Penitentiary and their their experiment with solitary confinement. Yeah. And now you have these prisons that are basically universities for crime. So very expensive taxpayer institutions. And you bring in people for small drug offenses and you lock them up for a very long time and you make criminals out of them. That's basically what you do. You ask the taxpayer to fund the education of criminals in Norway. They have the opposite. So they bring in people as criminals and they make tax paying law abiding citizens with jobs out of them. That's what they do. It's the economics of that system is really interesting. There was recently a paper that was published by two Norwegian and two American economists where they looked into the financial side of the Norwegian prison system. And they found that every bit of money that they invest in the system there, they get it back with a double, double the rate of return. So they get it back twice. It's really, really fascinating because they just they save so much money in terms of what they have to spend on health care or benefits or whatever because they create these people who have a 40 percent higher chance of failure. 40 percent higher chance of finding a job. Well, it's a pretty great system. There was there was a group of American prison officials who went to a trip to Norway, one from North Dakota. And initially they were very skeptical. But then they looked at the system and they looked at the numbers. And even these very conservative people said, you know, it's just it's just more practical. So there's a wonderful quote from someone who said, I'm not a liberal, but this is just more practical. I love that line. So what does this say to the moment now in the U.S. with the calls for defunding the police and, you know, carso reform? Does it lead you to think that we can we can and should vastly reform our criminal justice system here? Well, I completely understand the call for defund the police because there's a long history of talking about community policing and talking about courses for, I don't know, racial awareness and profiling, ethnic profiling, awareness and blah, blah, blah. And it hasn't really delivered. And then if you look at, you know, the kind of money that the U.S. spends on what we call guard labor, you know, security prison, a bit of the army as well. And then compared to other countries, it's just ridiculous. Well, a real good really good police officer should be is a kind of social worker, you know, where you just you just know the people in your community, you know, the grandfathers and the aunts and the uncles and people like you and they trust you. So that when there's really something bad that happens when they're serious crime that they can be your allies, you know, they can give you valuable information. But yeah, the U.S. system is all about seeing a potential criminal in each and everyone. And I mean, we earlier talked about the self-fulfilling prophecy. If you look at other people like savages, then well, you're going to behave like a savage. That's basically what you're going to do. I mean, if there's a crowd of peaceful protesters and you show up in riot gear, what do you expect? Right. So, Rutger, you know, I'm super sympathetic to the core of your argument. People are mostly good. You know, for my own part, I see human beings, homo sapiens as falling on different kinds of continuums from, you know, everybody. Everybody is different and people have different kinds of personalities. And it is indeed true that we have tons and tons of most people are fundamentally decent, fundamentally honest, fundamentally cooperative. But, you know, we also have our Donald Trump's. People are people who are horrible people and who are narcissistic sociopaths. Yeah. So how do we organize human societies to maximize the good stuff and minimize the bad stuff? OK, so a couple of things. In Dutch, my book is called Most People Are Pretty Decent. So focus on the most. Not all people are pretty decent. I think that's important to recognize. Yes. People who are inherently trusting. And that's what we are. We have this what psychologists call true default bias. We just are quickly inclined to believe and trust each other. And that is exactly what makes us so successful. I mean, imagine a society where we distrust each other all the time, where I don't know, you're at a dinner table and someone says, pass me the salt. And you're like, well, let me consult my lawyer. You know, let's draw up a contract and then see, you know, that's that would be very ineffective society. So trust is just economically, practically so much more efficient than distrusting other people. This is actually one of the things that I as a Dutchman dislike a little bit about the US. I mean, I do interviews and then they sent me this release form afterwards, which is absolutely ridiculous. I mean, what do you think? Why do you think I just gave the interview? Because you have to release it. Right. But I don't know. That's sort of it seems to me sort of a sign of distrust that you think that I don't suppose supposedly going to sue someone. It's not very effective and it's a huge waste of time. So nomadic and together is already knew that even though most people can be trusted, you have to be wary of the sociopaths of the Donald Trump's basically. Now, imagine Donald Trump in prehistory because we were for 95 percent of our history. We were in a medic and together is. Well, I think that anthropologists would agree that Donald Trump wouldn't have survived for a long time. No, no, no. They would have people would have liked him. They would have chucked him in the river. Yeah. Yeah. Well, he wouldn't have had a lot of friends. So the most likely scenario was that he would just have died alone and you just can't survive. So he would have gone hungry and then died alone. If it would have been really nasty, then indeed he would have been expelled from the group. If he would have started killing other people, then he would have been executed by the group at some point. That's what we know from anthropologists who've studied nomadic and together tribes around the globe. And they're really striking similarities. There are also big differences here. So obviously it's a controversial way. It's very hard to know how we live 20,000, 30,000 years ago. But I still think that this is convincing because it's you see it in all these different societies, whether we're talking about the north of Alaska or the Kalahari Desert near Namibia. You see this pattern again and again that these nomadic and together societies are quite egalitarian and humbleness is so, so important. So if you are a leader in such society, you have to be self-depreciating all the time. And if you're a fantastic hunter, then you come back with some great prize or you just killed a deer or something like that or gazelle. And then someone asks you, well, did you catch anything today? And then you say, no, no, not really. And then that person would know, oh, you know, tonight's going to be a feast. You know, we're going to have a great dinner. Obviously, we've now ended up in a very different kind of society where it's not survival of the friendliest often, but it seems to be survival of the shameless, which is pretty much the opposite. And that is, I think, a real indictment of our current what we call democratic system, but that I would call an elective aristocracy. And the reason that this happens is I think because of very fundamental force that psychologists have known about for a very long time, which is called the corruption of power. We just know that power is an incredibly dangerous drug. And any sane society needs to be very, very wary of this. Yeah, interesting. So where do we go from here? What's your prescription for the future? I think we have to go back to the simple insight that what you assume in each other is what you get out of each other. So if it's true that we've designed a society in the past, I don't know, 40 to 50 years, especially in this era that we call the neoliberal era, where so many of our institutions, our schools, democracies, workplaces, we're based on the dogma that people are just selfish and that we have to deal with it, then maybe we can turn that around and maybe we could start building different kind of schools and workplaces that start with an assumption of trust. And in my book, I just try to give a couple of case studies. I don't think we should think in blueprints. So what may work here may not work there. But yeah, there are a lot of really exciting examples to look at. I've got one example of an organization in the Netherlands that is called Bürzurk, which translates as something like neighborhood care. And it was founded in 2006, started with two self-directed teams of nurses, like 12, 13 nurses in a team. And the founder, Joost de Bloch, decided to basically not work with any management. Now it's an organization with 15000 employees, voted five times employer of the year. Delivering higher quality health care for a cheaper price and paying the employees a higher salary as well. It's like win, win, win, win, win. And the simple philosophy of this organization is all about trust, trust, trust. So let people, let professionals do their job. They hire their own colleagues. They decide for themselves what additional education they need. They have got this internal online platform where they sort of share expertise and knowledge. It's really an interesting model. And I think it's just so exciting what can happen in an organization if you actually say, hey, wait a minute, maybe I'm not supposed to be this manager high up in the tower trying to make things happen. Maybe that's not what real leadership or real management has to look like. Maybe another company that I looked at, they called it reverse management. So they're the ideas that actually managers don't do anything unless they're asked to by the self-directed teams. You know, sort of the upside down of the current hierarchical model that we often have. Again, we shouldn't think in blueprints, but we can experiment, I think, in this direction. We've come to the end of our time with you, Rucker. Is there any particular point you think we've missed here that you'd like to make? Oh, well, if people say, hey, but wait a minute, this sounds a little bit naive, this sounds a little bit romantic, then I always reply that actually what I'm trying to do in my book is to redefine what it means to be a realist. So often when we say, oh, you've got to be a bit more realistic, we say, you've got to be a bit more pessimistic or be a bit more cynical. But I think that actually the cynics are really naive and the cynics are intellectually and practically lazy. Cynicism is another word for laziness. So I think that we should move to a new realism. That's what the book is all about. Cynicism is a form of laziness. I love that. Hear that, Goldie? I'm not a cynic, I'm a skeptic. There's a difference. I totally agree. That's an important difference, yeah. But a lot of cynics hide behind the label of I'm a skeptic. No, you're actually a cynic. If we were all true cynics, we wouldn't be doing what we're doing. That's true. So trying to change the story. And we thank you, Rucker, because your books have been great. Your public contributions have been tremendously helpful towards changing the narrative out there. Thanks, man. Thank you for being with us today. Thanks for having me, guys. Until next time. I think that one of the most interesting things I learned from Rucker's book in this conversation is what a thin veneer theory is. Veneer theory, which is something, by the way, I'd never heard of until- Well, you heard of it. You just didn't know the name. Yeah, that's right. I had absolutely incorporated that idea into my worldview in all sorts of conscious and unconscious ways. And it is really fascinating when you pause and realize that most of the available evidence shows that in the absence of constraint, people tend towards cooperation in the good. For me, one of the things he mentioned was trust, this idea that we operate on trust and most people can be trusted. And when we have this story that says, oh, no, no, no, you can't trust anybody. You got to sign that release form after you do that podcast interview. From an economic perspective, the thing about trust is that it lowers transaction costs. Correct. And that if we tell this story that you can't trust anybody, well, then that increases transaction costs in society because now you have to have a contract for every single relationship. Whereas in a truly cooperative economy, which is what we believe the market fundamentally is, the more trusting people are, the lower the costs of running that economy and the better off everybody is. That's right. And this is why, for instance, companies run by leaders who have huge amounts of integrity tend to outcompete companies run by jerks. Because in a company that's run by people with lots and lots of integrity, everybody trusts one another. It's like rocket fuel for a competitive organization. When people trust one another, it makes getting stuff done so much easier. If we want to tackle the greatest challenges of our times, we do absolutely, as Redker says, need to completely start with a review of human nature. And if we get that right, a lot of our policies, politics, and practices will be more right in the end. So Goldie, in our next episode, we get to talk to the prescient Stephanie Kelton of modern monetary theory fame, who is getting to see her theory explored in real time in the United States by the very people who derided her as a charlatan. Right. We'll be talking to Stephanie about her new book, The Deficit Myth, a little bit about the applications of MMT in the real world, and also, Nick, the most cogent and persuasive argument for a federal jobs guarantee I've ever heard. So looking forward. See you next week.