 Hey Pitchfork listeners, Goldie here. We spend a lot of time on the podcast talking about neoliberalism, where it went wrong, how it started. And one of the common narratives is that it arose in the 1970s as a response to the failure of Keynesianism to deal with stagflation, the era in which we had double digit unemployment and double digit inflation at the same time. But that raises the question, what is Keynesianism? And who is John Maynard Keynes? Well, Keynes was without a doubt the most influential economist of the first three quarters of the 20th century. It was his ideas that guided the policies of the New Deal and that essentially defined American liberalism in the 1930s, 40s, 50s, 60s, and into the 70s. And while many neoliberal economists continue to try to discredit Keynes, it turns out many of his ideas are as relevant today as they ever were. Well, recently I had the pleasure of reading the new book, The Price of Peace, Money, Democracy, and the Life of John Maynard Keynes. And of course, one of the great benefits of hosting a podcast is that I also get to talk to the author, Zach Carter. I'm Zach Carter. I am the author of The Price of Peace, Money, Democracy, and the Life of John Maynard Keynes. And I am a senior reporter at HuffPost. I have to admit, I had to put down your book about three quarters of the way through and pause for a couple days when you started to get into the rise of neoliberalism and how McCarthyism went after the Keynesian economists. And I think all of this is relevant to what's going on today, but that brings me to my, I guess, my first question, what is it that most Americans get wrong about Keynesianism? It's a big question. And I think unfortunately the answer is almost everything. Keynes is somebody who most of us encounter in an Econ 101 course, at least that's the way I did. And in that Econ 101 course, I learned that John Maynard Keynes is the economist who argued that governments should spend money during recessions to help sort of pull the economy out of the doldrums and get employment moving again. And that's true. That's one of the things Keynes talked about. But Keynes never really thought of himself as a deficit therapist and certainly would not have wanted to be remembered as one. He was a social thinker. He was a philosopher and a statesman whose project, intellectual project, was concerned with the great problems of his day. And those problems in particular were World War I, the Great Depression, and the rise of authoritarianism, particularly in Europe, but also authoritarianism was on the rise all over the world in the 1920s and 1930s. We just didn't get Hitler's everywhere. So Keynes is developing these economic ideas in order to prevent war, sort of heal societies that have been torn apart or put under strain by the First World War, and try to create some set of conditions in which the life that he enjoyed at the turn of the 20th century when he was a member of the famous Bloomsbury set, people like E.M. Forster and Litton Strachey and Virginia Woolf, that that sort of life could be enjoyed by people outside the very high-flying elite circles that he lived in. So he's concerned with all of these very big ideas about humanity and how to get along. He's not just a guy who talks about deficits and to try to separate the deficit stuff from the rest of his thinking, I think certainly got the economics profession into trouble in the 1960s and 1970s. I don't think it makes a whole lot of sense today when people are talking about big deficits and shouldering big debt loads to deal with the coronavirus. That's all fine and good, but those deficits, those debts are not ends in themselves. They are part of a broader social agenda. Right, so the purpose of, I think Keynes would have agreed that the purpose of economics is not to keep unemployment low and inflation low and balance your budgets. It's actually to lead the good life. Yes, and to prevent social upheaval and social unrest. There's a sense in which Keynes is a very conservative thinker in that he's deeply afraid of revolution and deeply afraid of sudden radical change, though he's somebody who is constantly advocating rather slow radical change, I think. But he's afraid of upheaval because he thinks it could break apart the things that allow for him to enjoy this great life he has in Bloomsbury. He really likes drinking champagne with Virginia Woolf. He likes hearing from his friends who are painters about what Gertrude Stein and Pablo Picasso are up to in Paris. So he thinks that's great and he thinks revolution and particularly right wing authoritarian revolution will put that sort of lifestyle in jeopardy. I think when we look today at the way the government has responded to the coronavirus pandemic, certainly there are all the failures on the pandemic itself from the public health standpoint. But I don't think Keynes would look at Congress and say, well, my goodness, they spent four and a half trillion, something like that, supporting the economy. Their work is done. Great work. Ran up some big numbers there. He recognized that those big numbers are certainly necessary, but the real test of the program for him would be what's happening in the streets. And I think the fact that we had essentially social uprisings across every American city just a few weeks ago is a testament to the insufficiency of the response, at least in a Keynesian sense. It's fascinating because of course you talk in the book about what I've always thought was kind of this overblown competition between Hayek and Keynes. And I think you present it that way too. It's not like they interacted that much. Keynes did respond to Hayek, but they both seem to have a similar goal. They were both trying to prevent that road to serfdom, the rise of authoritarianism. They just went in very different directions. Hayek ultimately won ideologically, I guess. It looks to me like that was the road to serfdom. How disappointed would Keynes be if he saw the world today? It's dangerous to raise the dead and interrogate them, but I think he would be shocked, frankly. I don't know if disappointment would be the right word. I think he'd just be totally stunned at the changes that have been wrought in conventional wisdom intellectually and in style of governance and public policymaking since the 1970s. Your point about the Hayek-Keynes sort of feud being overblown I think is exactly right. In the 1930s, Hayek and Keynes were both economists, but neither of them were these titanic figures of Western intellectual history. Hayek was an obscure professor. Keynes had written a very famous book. Keynes was somebody who was well known, but Hayek certainly was not. Even Hayek himself came to regret the economic arguments that he made against Keynes in the early 1930s. You're right that they are very much concerned with Enlightenment liberalism, which they're both deeply enamored with. It's a tradition that they both think is very important, these ideas about individual liberty, about freedom of conscience, about the free exchange of ideas and culture across national borders. This matters very much to both of them, but they have very different conceptions about how to achieve those goals. I think it's important to understand that Keynes absolutely considers himself a liberal in the capital L sense, not just sort of Democratic Party, vaguely aligned, kind of left of center sense. He takes that tradition very seriously, but he believes that if the economic policies that liberals put forward don't deliver the goods, if they do not actually produce a harmonious and happy society, then you will have all of those great Enlightenment ideals shattered by authoritarian uprisings. And Hayek sees things very differently. He says, well, look, if we do Social Security, for instance, then we have already broken our faith with liberalism. We have shattered individual liberty and freedom of conscience and the like, just through the act of making those policies. It's a very different approach, but it's rooted in the same intellectual tradition. So I think today, if you follow online debates among liberals and people who call themselves leftists, there's this idea that liberalism is what Hayek said it was. Essentially the neoliberal sort of triumph since the 1970s is true liberalism. And the sort of things that Keynes was talking about, those don't count as liberalism anymore. I think Keynes would be very perplexed by that and very upset by it to see that a lot of his intellectual allies were in many ways rejecting his intellectual tradition at the same time. So not only would he be disheartened by the turn in the way governments sort of deal with inequality, deal with trade, deal with financial markets and all the rest that we've seen since the 1970s, he'd be very disheartened by the way that the left has sort of accepted the framework that the Hayekian sort of intellectual descendants of Hayek have insisted is the right one. Because for all of the McCarthyite attacks on the Keynesians after World War II, Keynes was no socialist. He's a tricky figure because the word socialism is a very loaded term for him. He visits Bolshevik Russia and is just horrified on a couple of occasions. His wife, who he marries in 1925, is from St. Petersburg. And so they go back a couple of times to visit her family there. And Keynes is not a fan of the cultural life in Russia. He doesn't like the things that the government does, the sort of policy tools they use. But more than that, he doesn't like the air of sort of, it's like you're in a paranoid noir thriller. He just feels like he's being watched all the time and people are whispering about him. And it's true because people are. It's a surveillance state. And he thinks that this is bad for art. This is not just unpleasant to live in. It's culturally counterproductive to nurturing that kind of lifestyle and artistic and intellectual experience that he found so rewarding in Bloomsbury. But at the same time, he talks often about something called liberal socialism, which would be a way of conceiving of society as something that had to be taken care of as a whole by the government, but that still respected these individual liberties and ideals that come with the liberal tradition. So he is willing to take policy steps that many other people in the liberal tradition at the time were unwilling to. At the most radical we see around World War II, he's the financial architect of the National Health Service and the British welfare states. He does play a role in socializing British medicine, a very significant role. But for much of the 1930s, he's trying to work with the Liberal Party and people like David Lloyd George to do things that are sort of a precursor to the New Deal in the United States. In many ways, the New Deal, I think, sort of expresses the full ambition of the Keynesian project. But the New Deal is not just social security and deficits. The New Deal is all of these new programs that had just never existed in the United States. It's a total reworking of the nation state and what it can and ought to do. So whether that constitutes socialism or not, I think Keynes, depending on which audience he's talking to, would be very cagey and very careful about how he used that word because he was appalled by socialism as understood in Russia. But if socialism is social security and the WPA, well, that sounds okay to him. Right. And I think one of the things that you do beautifully in this book, both through the biographical details and the summarization of his writings, is demonstrating how incredibly intellectually flexible Keynes was, which is kind of unusual with great men. And by great men, I mean great men. I mean great white men. Once they achieve some amount of fame, they stick with it and defend it. And Keynes, his thinking changed over time. Yeah, you're right. It becomes sort of a brand for people. The intellectuals who become known for a particular thing feel like they can never retreat from it because it's because being wrong and having a good brand is more important than being right. Keynes comes out of Bloomsbury where people are constantly arguing about art all the time. And so disagreement is not something that is alien to him. And certainly the Cambridge Economics Department, it's really important for people when they think about Keynes and his role as an economist, not to mistake the milieu in Cambridge in the 1920s and 30s for the sort of American business school style education that people get in economics today. This was a place where economists were sort of weirdos. If you studied economics, it was kind of like being a poet or a philosopher. These were things that were a little bit off the beaten path in academia and not necessarily a ticket to a great public policy job or to power in large part because there weren't jobs for economists in the private sector for the most part. Most economists were, that kind of role for the profession really arose with the New Deal and all of the different types of agencies that arose from the expansion of the state that we saw there. But for Keynes, Cambridge is a very collaborative place. There isn't a whole lot of people use each other's ideas, edit each other's papers, cite each other all the time. There's not a whole lot of pride of authorship. So in a lot of ways, what we call Keynesian economics, what comes out of Cambridge in the 1930s is a project of several people working together. And some of these people are even graduate students. Some of them don't even have degrees in economics. But Keynes is just sort of the director of the orchestra. And I think it's fair to say that he's the sharpest guy in that milieu. But there are also some stone cold geniuses he's working with, people like Joan Robinson, who are major, major economists in their own right after Keynes has gone. Who I think, by the way, there's a lot of characters in this book. Obviously, he's from the Bloomsbury set and so on. But I think Joan Robinson is one of the most fascinating people in this book. And I was only peripherally familiar with her. There's a quote. I don't have it in front of me, but it's something to the effect of, she said that the purpose of studying economics is to learn how not to be deceived by economists. But I had no idea how closely she worked with Keynes and really was a silent co-author on the general theory. Yes. And if you go through the collected writings, there's a 30 volume set of Keynes' papers and speeches and drafts and letters that are related to economics that Cambridge University has published. When you get to the volume on the general theory, it's just hundreds and hundreds of pages of stuff being traded back and forth between Robinson and Keynes. It's very clear that the two of them are working very closely. He's also working closely with other people at Cambridge who think he's wrong. And so he'll share drafts with people. And I think Dennis Robertson is one of them. They'll say, I don't know what you're on to about here, Maynard. This makes no sense here. You can't be right. But Robinson, in a lot of ways, Keynes likes that milieu. He likes the back and forth. He likes the idea that he would put something out there that would stimulate conversation and help the world get to the right answer. The thing was not to become Keynes the great man and lead the school of thought. It was to help the world get closer to the truth so that good policies could be made and society could hang together and he could get back to drinking champagne with Virginia Wolf. For Robinson, she sees the project very differently. She really thinks Keynesian thought can be a school of ideas, much the way that Marxism was or the way Buddhism is. She sees this as a discipline and the general theory as being the core text that you have to return to to understand this school of thought. And she's quite good at teaching students in Cambridge to see the field that way. And when they go back to the United States and start trying to be academics or working in the Roosevelt administration, they take that thinking with them. So she's enormously influential even on people who don't end up coming to see Keynesianism the way that she does. People who ultimately over the decades after Keynes's death have sharp disagreements with her about what is significant or important in the general theory. The fact that they feel like they need to talk about it as an important text is something they're getting from Robinson. There are a lot of books on economics that are published in the 1920s and 1930s saying, no, no, no, no, the profession's got it all wrong. We need to change course. And a lot of those books talk about policy ideas that end up being implemented later, but we don't talk about them the way we talk about Keynesian economics. And it's kind of funny that Robinson, I think more than anyone else is responsible for that. And yet we don't call it Robinsonian economics. We call it Keynesian economics. In the book, you talk about a speech she gave late in her life in which she gave the entire economics profession a real tongue lashing. She had a way with words. And when she's writing and talking for the public, it can be just, it could be wonderful to go through it because she's so clear. She uses metaphor in a way that makes her ideas very accessible to people who are not professionally trained economists. But when she's talking to professionally trained economists, she can just be absolutely vicious. And this speech from the meeting of the American Economics Association, I don't have it in front of me, it's 71 or 72. John Kenneth Galbraith had invited her to give the keynote address. Galbraith and Robinson were great friends. In many ways, I think later in his career, Robinson's sort of the most important Robinson disciple in the United States. But Robinson just says, look, the Keynesian approach to economics has been a failure. We have not fixed war. We have not fixed poverty. We have not saved the environment. We're sitting around here patting ourselves on the back for solving all of the problems that we think economics is tasked with solving, and in a sense, we have because we've defined economics in such a way that it only answers the questions that don't need to be asked. All of the questions that are important have been sort of shoved off to other areas. And so she's very disappointed. But she was doing the same thing that Keynes was in important ways. Keynes believed very deeply that getting it right, that showing people, presenting good ideas and persuading people with them was a way to influence politicians, public policy, politics and the world at large. And that was a very controversial thing to believe in the 1930s because the more popular version of sort of social critique against the established order was Marxism, and a very kind of crude form of Marxism, which just held that there was nothing you could do about the problems in the world through the political process, that the state was the executive committee of the bourgeoisie, that nothing but social revolution would work because vested interests would always protect their territory. And so Robinson, whose politics were probably closer to those Marxists than they were to Keynes' own politics, spends much of her life trying to persuade economists that Keynes is right. I mean, she is on this very similar kind of project of using ideas to shape the world, even though she herself often criticizes Keynes for being too naive about the way politics work and the way power is distributed. Let's talk a bit about the so-called Keynesianism of the 1970s that Robinson criticized. One of the narratives today is that the neoliberal era we're in came out of the failure of Keynesianism in the 1970s with stagflation, that the Keynesian economists had no answer to this when we had high inflation and high unemployment at the same time, and Milton Friedman was ready with an alternative. And lo and behold, we have the past 45 years. Was that Keynesianism? Would Keynes have recognized the economics of the time as Keynesianism? So it's Keynesianism because that's what people started calling Keynesianism. But Keynes himself, I think, would have been a little perplexed. As you were mentioning earlier, Keynes is somebody who's capable of changing his mind. He was not a doctrinearian. But even had he been a doctrinearian, the type of doctrine that people were pursuing in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations in some ways was aligned with Keynes' thinking and in some ways very much was not. The projects that Johnson was concerned with domestically, like the Great Society, this is a massive expansion of the state in a lot of ways. When we think of the New Deal and its significance, we're overstating what Roosevelt achieved because many of those programs survived in much more ambitious forms after they were reformed by Johnson and the Great Society. So these are enormously successful programs, the invention of Medicare. Everybody declines drastically after the Great Society initiatives begin. This includes voting rights, all sorts of civil rights reforms that are also under attack today, many of which have been repealed as well. But the Vietnam War is not something that Keynes would have been enthusiastic about. He spent his whole life trying to prevent war, and he believed that economic policy was a very effective tool, maybe the only effective tool that could be deployed non-violently to prevent war. The fact that there were Keynesian economists, or people who called themselves Keynesian in both the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, saying, the thing we need to do is spend money. It doesn't really matter so much what we spend it on. We could spend it on napalm and machine guns or we could spend it on welfare checks. So long as we're spending, we're going to get the economy up and moving again. That would have been horrifying to Keynes. He said that, but he meant it as a metaphor. He didn't mean it literally. You could just bury it in the ground and pay people to dig up money, but that's not... He wasn't advocating for that. In Robinson's speech to the AEA in 72, she actually says, you guys are idiots. He didn't actually want people to bury stuff in the backyard and pay people to dig it up. That's not the right idea. Build useful stuff. Right. But the way that the profession became technical, there are a couple sides to Keynes. He is very much a technocrat who is good with numbers and capable of devising very detailed and fine-tuned policies to address specific problems, but he wasn't obsessed with creating rigid technical doctrines that had to be followed no matter what the circumstances were. One of the intellectual tools that becomes very, very popular in the 50s and 60s is this thing called the Phillips Curve. It's named after an Australian economist named Phillips, but it really becomes popularized because of the work of Robert Solow and Paul Samuelson in the United States who expand on this initial insight and do a lot more research with American data, and then start putting it most importantly in Samuelson's economics textbook. The Phillips Curve says, this doctor says there's a trade-off between unemployment and inflation that you can have a little more unemployment and a little less inflation or a little more inflation and a little less unemployment, but no matter what you do, when you're adjusting aggregate demand, those two have to move in opposite directions. When you get to the late 1960s and the early 1970s, that stops happening. You start seeing unemployment and inflation going up at the same time. However, people like Milton Friedman point to this and say, aha, because Paul Samuelson says this is impossible and Paul Samuelson is a Keynesian, Keynesianism is disproved. Friedman has a whole story about how the Keynesian project from really World War II on got everything wrong. He gives this very famous speech in 1967, which becomes the intellectual foundation for the neoliberal takeover of the American government in the later 1970s, beginning with the Carter administration. The thing to remember about that speech is that almost everything Friedman says in that 1967 speech is wrong. He gets his characterization of what Keynesian said in World War II is incorrect. We were not experiencing high inflation in 1967. We only really had moderate inflation in the early 70s. We're about to go off a cliff and have hyperinflation prediction that Friedman has doesn't hold water either, and his historical story is just nonsense, but he's a very persuasive guy and he does bring together a lot of data. Some of which he fudged, actually a lot of which he fudged, it turns out. It doesn't hold up that well in retrospect, I think. And things like, we don't have to get into the definition of monetarism here, but he believes that essentially there's this thing that exists outside of government that's called the economy and the only variable that the government needs to worry about is the money supply. But he can't decide what the money supply is, what constitutes money, because once he comes up with a specific definition, none of his story makes any sense. Historically, the trends just don't hold up. It's not only not useful, it's just not intellectually coherent, but it doesn't matter. He's a persuasive guy and look, the economy of the 1970s, the mid-1970s is not great. We do have double digit inflation and double digit unemployment and the reasons for that are complicated. Certainly I think the oil embargo that the United States was living through contributed quite a bit to that because you need oil in everything to ship everything. So that's causing prices to go up, but it's not the only thing that's causing prices to go up. Right. We go off the gold standard. I mean, there's good or bad, it's a shock. Right. Even people like Galbraith say, look, all this military spending has been inflationary. We have to be honest about that. So I find inflation a very tricky thing and there was a lot going on in the 1970s. I don't have a clear cut answer for why we had stagflation, but historically the point that matters is that people did pick up on Friedman's doctrine and they picked up on it not only because he was a persuasive guy who made arguments that seemed compelling, but because he was closely aligned with politicians on the right who believed they could implement that agenda in ways that would fuel their own social projects, which were very different from the social projects that Keynes and FDR and LBJ would have approved of. So Friedman, most importantly, in the 1950s, before he was a famous economist, was trying to devise housing policies that would allow wealthy white families to get around Brown versus the board of education and stay in segregated schools. So all of these economists who become famous have very serious and detailed social visions that they are working to implement. They're not just pursuing the science and the data wherever it takes them and then saying, oh, well, I guess we have to privatize all the schools. Keynes was pretty open about this during his life. I don't think Friedman was quite as open, but he was open about his politics. He did discuss his worldview, his conception of freedom in books, and he was an advisor to Barry Goldwater and was quite- Yeah, and Pinochet. And authoritarians like so Pinochet, who Hayek also advised as well. The idea that the economics profession can be, and that the turn in the consensus about what was reasonable and what was good economics that takes place in the 1970s, the idea that that's attributable only to science and to looking at the Phillips curve breaking down, I think is a bit naive. It happens because politicians who are rising stars, who are having success because of the bad economic conditions of the 1970s want to use neoliberal economics to pursue their social project. And look, we know that economists still act like this today, and yet we still allow economists to say, well, here's the data. What can you do? And I think in certain ways it's led to a distrust with the profession among the public and degraded the respect for the expertise in ways that Keynes would have found very troubling. There should be some disrespect. I mean, look at the world, right? Yeah, economics has failed us. This is the world we have right now, the level of extreme radical inequality. We had this conversation with Nancy McLean about this, the goal of economists like Buchanan was to destroy democracy. They were fundamentally anti-democratic. You have that quote from Friedman about Pinochet, that given the choice between economic liberty and political liberty, he'd choose economic liberty. He was okay with an authoritarian government. I think that's Hayek. What's it, Hayek? Or Friedman? I think so. I mean, look, Friedman might have said something very similar, so I could be... I don't want to... certainly his politics were similar in that respect. I don't think... Friedman was a guy who, like Hayek, would say things like, a minimum wage is socialism. Right. Progressive taxation is socialism. The choice between socialism and liberty, for him, we really are talking about a stage that does not do anything to take care of its people. Friedman is much more radical in this, that Hayek is in The Road to Serfdom. The Road to Serfdom is a strange book in a lot of ways, because much of the narrative just doesn't match Hayek's politics. It's funny, because talking about raising the dead, I'd love to see a debate between 1940s Hayek and 1970s Hayek. Yes, yes. Right. In the 1940s, he's talking about... he said, well, we have to regulate things, because otherwise the environment will fall apart. We have to have some decent minimum standard of living for people, because otherwise they'll die and revolt. All of these things, which he later is just like, no, no, no. Let's advise the guy pushing people out of helicopters. That is always happening. It's always happening, and it's inescapable. The economics profession is... it's an inherently political thing, because you can't have an economy without governing, without social structures that pull levers of power. But also because the economics profession has become the priesthood that governments turn to, to say, look, my program is legitimate. Without the economics profession, there's no independent observer who can say, ah, yes, the politicians have it right, or oh, no, the politicians have it wrong. The profession just is part of the political process at this point, which was not true in the 1930s when Keynes was writing. If you wanted to get a great job in the British Treasury or at the Bank of England, you would do just as well to have studied mathematics or poetry or art, and then had a few years working at, say, Lloyd's Bank than if you had studied economics. I mean, that was a peculiar thing to do. It wasn't seen as the sort of great entree into policymaking. So I know we're running out of time. Let's try to answer the question. I think I almost asked at the beginning, what is Keynesianism in a way that Keynes might agree with your answer? I think Keynesianism is more a way of looking at the world than a specific set of policies or policy tools. Keynes was a very great optimist, in many ways, I think, a delusional optimist. But he always believed that humanity's problems were made by humanity. They weren't facts of nature that were unalterable. The world could become a better place if we just made it better. Tomorrow could always be better than today. And that spirit of optimism, in many ways, I think, led him astray politically because he lost most of the political battles during his lifetime. Between World War I and World War II, almost every single major policy fight that he gets into, he loses. He only starts to become really influential during the war and then after the war and after his death. But I think that spirit of optimism is really essential to understanding Keynes and Keynesianism. And I think his belief in the good life, that art and love are these central things that make life worth living and they're not exclusive goods. You can enjoy the same painting that I enjoy without diminishing our love of the moment in any way. That there are social things that people can do together and appreciate together that make the world a richer and better place, that are not based on making sure that some people have more than others. So I think he'd see it as a project of social harmony. One way of saying that is that it's a project to, Keynesianism is a project designed to reduce inequality. I think that's the language we'd use today. I think he would think that language is a little bit narrow. He'd say, you know, this isn't just math. This is the way societies hang together. This is the way people interact with each other. This is the way societies interact with one another. The way that people who are different come together to do things that they couldn't do apart. That's a long answer and it's a complicated one. But I think that spirit is essential to understanding the economics. Without the economics, without that idea, those ideas, the economics don't make any sense at all. And so the fact that we've spent so much time trying to make sense of the economics in a vacuum I think is part of the reason that the project has been so unsuccessful. Right. I think in economics they make this distinction between positive economics and normative economics. It looks to me like Keynes didn't make that distinction. It's all normative. It's all normative, right. In that this is you should worry about what it should be and not as much what it is. Yes. Describing it. Well, that's great. I really enjoyed the book. Are you working on, it looks like it was a big project. Are you working on anything else? Yes. Yes. Look, took forever. I mean, I started working on it in a sense right after the financial crisis of 2008. But from when I started writing the proposal to when I finished this, about four years. But the next book is called Fields of Fire. It is also with Random House and my editor over there, Molly Turpin. And it's a look at the populist uprising movement revolt of the 1880s and 1890s and told through the eyes of a few key figures who I haven't quite figured out yet. But it'll be a couple of years and then hopefully I'll have a great deal to talk to you about when it's done. That sounds great. And when you're done with that, you can talk about, you can write a book on the populist uprisings of the 2020s. Yes. Well, I think that's where we're headed. So, oh, God, it's a scary world out there right now. It is, but we can make it better. It's actually possible. From Cain's lips to my ears. I don't know how that works. To God's ears. There you go. Sounds right to me. Yeah. Thanks for your time, Zach. I really enjoyed the conversation. Thanks so much. It was great talking to you. On the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we talk with political philosopher Elizabeth Anderson about the modern workplace, the communist dictatorships in our midst. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.