 The average citizen is going to get hammered unless we find ways to access the enormous amounts of wealth that we have in this country to address these problems. What we need to do is dump cash into the bank accounts of the American people and keep them going until we get through this pandemic and then maybe we can pick up where we left off. All of these issues compound in ways that you only learn about in a crisis unless you've been paying close attention. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, one American capitalist desperate attempt to save us from ourselves. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. Hello, podcast listeners. We're back, me on a proper mic. And Nick, you from your secure location. Yes, indeed. We're here this episode to answer questions, your questions about the coronavirus pandemic and its economic impact. So, Annie, we got a lot of questions from listeners, I understand. Yeah, we got a flood of questions. We got voicemails. We got emails. We got Instagram DMs. They're coming from all sides. OK. OK. You ready to go? Absolutely. All right. So the first one is from email. I just wanted to get your thoughts on the upcoming economic crisis and how bad it will be. Personally, I think it will be much worse than 2008. Given the title of your show, what do you think will happen? Will the government and wealthy elites step in to help the rest of us or will the pitchfork start coming out? Because the current administration and majority of wealthy people couldn't care less what happens to us lesser folks. Anyway, love the podcast. Keep up the good work. Well, I mean, you know, let's just address directly, you know, will the government and wealthy elite step in to help the rest of us? I mean, I think that that even that framing is a neoliberal framing. No society should need permission from wealthy people to operate in a high functioning way. But for sure, you know, if the government is run by people like Mitch McConnell and Ted Cruz and Rand Paul, you can guarantee that wealthy citizens will not bear their fair share of the burden. Those people see their role as defending economic elites. Goldy, correct me if I'm wrong, but is it not true that every single Republican member of Congress has signed the No New Taxes pledge? Grover Norquist's No New Taxes pledge? Absolutely. It may have changed in the last couple of years, but it's been that way for well over a decade. More than that. And so in a society where 100% of the Republican members of Congress have signed a pledge saying they will never pass a tax increase in a crisis… They will never vote for a tax increase of any kind, at any time, for any reason. That's right. But will the revolution come? I don't know. For sure, the average citizen is going to get hammered through this process unless we find ways to access the enormous amounts of wealth that we have in this country to address these problems. And the thing to keep in mind throughout all this is the economic crisis isn't necessary. It doesn't have to happen. No. We can do things to basically put the economy on hold, provide supplemental income for people who have been laid off due to the stay-at-home orders, suspend rents and mortgages and evictions and defaults so that people don't lose their homes. We can give everybody healthcare so that in our employer-based healthcare system where the minute you lose your job, you lose your healthcare in the midst of a pandemic, that's just crazy. We can address all these things. If we have the political will, we can do it. If we don't and we say, oh, well, you know, markets and leave it up to individuals to fend for themselves, it's going to be a fucking shit show, Nick. It's going to be a shit show out there for 60, 70, 80% of Americans. Correct. My name is Ashton. I'm calling from Fort Worth, Texas. My question is, what do you all think the aftermath of the virus is going to be economically, specifically corporate responsibility towards broader communities and maybe increased protections for small businesses since those are the people that are going to be there? Those are the people most affected by this whole social distancing shutdown that we have going on. And maybe if there will be a balance shift towards serving corporate interests now to serving small businesses and individual interests more. Thanks, guys. Love the show. Have a great day. Bye. So are things going to change better in the aftermath of the virus? I sure as hell hope so, Ashton, but I'm not hopeful. How about you, Nick? Yeah, again, I was baffled by how passive people were in the face of these super unfair arrangements before the virus. So it's really hard for me to judge where people are going to come out after it. And it really will be interesting to see where people land after this crisis. Do they continue to buy this neoliberal lie that when the rich get richer, everyone is better off and that we're all better off on our own and that government is the enemy, not an instrument of us all to… solve the collective action problems that we all face? Like, are people going to continue to subscribe to this idea that government should be small enough so that we can drown it in a bathtub? Are people going to continue to vote people into office who sign pledges saying, I will never pass a tax? Like, I have no idea. It just baffles me that people did it in the first place. So this is the thing, Ashton. Don't expect corporations to decide to be more responsible all by themselves. It's going to take pressure from consumers, from workers. It's going to take organizing. I mean, you see some hopeful signs already. Kroger, the second largest supermarket company, announced at least temporarily was a $2 or $3 increase per hour in hazard pay over the course of the pandemic. You had a company like, I think they're called Darden, which controls a restaurant group that owns places like Olive Garden that after just being hammered publicly announced that all of their employees would now get paid sick leave. And the hope is that as we claw back at these gains and over the course of the pandemic, that once workers have these things, they won't be taken away again. But they're not going to happen.