 So, Nick, you're a rich guy from Seattle. There was some news this week. Democrats and other critics of President Trump are urging former Starbucks chairman and CEO Howard Schultz to reconsider his potential plans for 2020. I am seriously considering running for president as a centrist independent. Don't help a lack of Trump, you egotistical billionaire h- Do you happen to have any thoughts about that? Yeah, well, you know, I like Howard and I have enormous respect for his, you know, his ability to run a retail business. But I have never been a fan of the idea that business leaders make great political leaders. And there's a couple of reasons why. So let me just start by saying, I profoundly disagree with Howard's economic policy ideas. He is, as far as I can tell, a straight up trickle downer who believes that tax cuts for rich people create growth and investments in the middle class will bankrupt our great country. He believes that raising wages kills jobs and all the rest of the neoliberal nonsense. We can't afford health care. We can't afford education. He's basically running on a platform of telling us we can't have nice things. Yeah, but rich people should get richer. And I profoundly disagree with that. I think he's dead wrong. But there's another thing I think worth teasing out, which is why business people so often make terrible political leaders. And it is this, that the thing about running a business is that everyone who works for the business, by definition, has to do what you say. They agree with you by definition. Otherwise, you would not hire them. And if they disagree with me... Well, what about me? Yeah, you're a pain in the ass, that Goldie. You know, somehow we work it out. But the truth is that when you run a business enterprise, you purposefully surround yourself with people who agree with you and will culturally and politically and just economically agree with you and will do what you say. And that skill set, make no mistake, doing that well is very, very difficult. And it requires a particular kind of personality and temperament, which is rare. But it's not a democracy. It is not a democracy. And so I have had a foot in both worlds for a very long time. I've been doing politics since I was a wee boy. And now, as you know, I run an enterprise which is solely devoted to political and civic things. And what I can tell you is that these two worlds are nothing alike. That in politics, almost no one agrees with you. And in fact, it may be a majority or even a super majority of people who actively are trying to subvert you. And what I have found is that the personality type that runs businesses effectively, their heads explode in circumstances where no one will do what they say. Trump. I'm sorry. President Trump being the canonical example of this. He simply cannot believe that we just don't all do what he says. And charismatic business leaders tend to be people who expect that. And again, you know, running, having run a business successfully does not necessarily disqualify you from being effective. But it in no way is a qualification for being a really effective political leader. And so, you know, I just can't say for certain that Howard would be a terrible political leader. But I do believe that his business qualifications do not in any way qualify him to be a political leader despite what he may say and what the broader public tends to believe. And finally, you know, the idea that the country should be run like a business makes me want to throw up. I mean, it's just it is just not a business. The country is not a business. And claiming that you should run the country like a business would be like claiming you should fly the airplane like a unicycle. You will crash. Like, it doesn't work like that. I just definitely do not believe that the country at this point needs what Howard thinks of this. I think they call it centrism, which basically in the Democratic Party is straight up trickle down economics, but without the racism. And you know, like, that's not what the country needs today. We need we need a different kind of leadership. So let's close this conversation, Nick, by making some news ourselves and having you answer the question that I'm always asked. When are you running for office? I'm not running. I'm not running. Howard Schultz is a great example of why people like me should not run. You know, like I want to try and do some good here on the margins and move the conversation about policy forward. But I probably wouldn't be a very good political leader. In any case, my business experience is not is not a qualification for it. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L A R J media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and you should also follow Nick Hanauer on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. Thanks for listening.