 Bring it right to the point. You ready? I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. So Nick, why are we calling this Pitchfork economics? If you don't get economics right, the Pitchforks come out. Violent clashes popping up on a day of demonstrations here at home. People are angry and they have a right to be angry because they have been taken advantage of for 40 years. Think of there's a theme to this podcast and simplest form is that bad theory leads to bad policy and bad policy leads to bad outcomes. Exactly. I think it's fair to say that every single thing people learned in their economics courses is just objectively false. Throughout this podcast, we will bring in some of the leading heterodox economic thinkers in the world. I'm Ganesh Sitaraman. Diane Coyle. Yuval Nohar Haurarange. James Kwa. Heather Bouché. My name is Robert Reich. That academic collaboration combined with real world experience has created a reasonably unique perspective on both economics and how markets work. One of the points of this podcast is to call the question on what the purpose of economics is, what the purpose of the economy is. We're going to talk about a lot of complicated subjects. We are. On the next episode of Pitchfork Economics. Everything you learned in Econ 101 is wrong. The trick and trickle down. Tax policy. Who pays and who doesn't. Why the US hates families. The lie that higher wages kill jobs. And the American dream. A lot of the things which you've been saying are economic heresy. Yes. People get so angry when you challenge these ideas. It turns out that if you change the way we talk about the economy, you can actually change the economy. Yes. That whether you're a policymaker or not, whether you're a political leader or not, whether you're an economist or not, individuals have a crucial role in creating economic policy by advancing the right narratives about it. And that's the point of this podcast. Take from it those ideas, these facts and these new stories. That should be a good episode.