 Hi, I'm Annie Fadley. I am a Senior Policy Associate at Civic Ventures. So we've been doing this podcast for a while and we are thinking that you probably have questions about some of the topics that we've discussed. So we're going to put together an AMA episode that stands for Ask Me Anything, Me as Nick, one where you can ask any economics related question that we might have missed. And the questions can be super simple or super complex or game for anything. Feel free to challenge us or ask us something fun and we'll just go where the questions take us. So the phone number is 731-388-9334. We're super excited to hear what you're all thinking about and make sure you look out for the episode because you might be on it achieving Pitchfork economics fame. What we've long understood though is that some communities have consistently had the odds stacked against them. An already low poverty line, the vast majority of the people who fall below that are working poor. Over half the jobs created by the economy since the 2008 financial crisis were poverty level jobs. So I hope this conversation continues, not as a question of weather, but of how we can work together to grow opportunity. Hugely what I have seen among people is a feeling of a loss of control over their future, over what they can do. A loss of agency. Yeah, just at the mercy of whatever rich dudes do next. Poverty isn't like a scratch or a bruise. We're talking about a really cancerous tumor and band-aids are really not the solution to the problem. We all want our country to be one where hard work pays off and responsibility is rewarded. We want a place where you can make it if you try. In the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. Appointed conversation about who gets what and why with one of America's most provocative capitalists. My name is Hannah Brooks-Olson. I am a writer. I am an award-winning journalist, which I always like to lead with. I am an anti-poverty advocate. I'm a former poor person and I am a college graduate, first in my family. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. You guys asked me to come in today. Oh, absolutely. You rolled out the red carpet for me. We rolled out the red carpet, Hannah, partially because we miss you and partially because this is an episode on poverty and why it's so hard to get out of poverty. Nick and I know a lot about the numbers, but we are the spoiled, privileged white men who actually never experience poverty ourselves, whereas you have a little more experience in the empirical real world reality of it. Yeah, I am a one-time ragamuffin. You are a genuine, a genuine export person. I am. I'm a Horatio Alger story sitting right in front of you. The exception that proves the rule. I think I'm actually the exception that proves that you can get exceptionally lucky over and over and over again and that even people who live in some degree of poverty can also be extremely privileged because that's the other thing. It's like I'm still white. I grew up with parents who valued education hugely even though they didn't necessarily have it. Yeah, you were already a thousand times ahead. But I also, I live in a family where both my siblings were also extremely, extremely smart and both don't have college degrees and they have very sort of, my sister especially is like a total, like more of an American dream than I am. She's a small business owner with no degree and she's amazing at it. But she's also someone who got lucky in a lot of ways. Well, that's a great starting point because I want to make a distinction here between the empirical reality of poverty, which we'll talk a lot about on this episode, and the theoretical and narrative devices that we use to explain or explain away poverty as the case might be. And I just want to focus for a moment on the theoretical side and the what we consider to be the relentless logic of the market and the way that it compounds advantages and disadvantages over time. And we mean that quite literally. Nick, I mean throughout this series, we have made this distinction between the neoclassical, orthodox, economic model of the economy as a closed equilibrium system and the emerging science that models the economy as a complex, adaptive and evolutionary system. And this is really important because in an evolutionary system, we are literally talking about a process of differentiation, selection and amplification. And just like in an ecosystem where you are evolving new creatures, we have a market economy that will amplify very small differences, little differences in adaptation. And you can have very small differences in starting point or even just tiny, seemingly insignificant random events. And that can result in very large outcomes that seem outsized compared to where you started. I mean, I think one really good example is the last, so say the last 10 years. I graduated from college in 2009, which was a great year to graduate from college if anyone recalls it, 2009. And now I'm in my 30s here in Seattle, Washington, one of the most expensive housing markets. And so it feels like both my starting point as I kind of entered into adulthood, and then now when I should be like really like tying it up, I'm waiting for the bubble to burst before I can do anything. And not because I made necessarily bad choices, literally just because of how old I am and the year I was born and the year things happened. Right. And by comparison, I graduated, I'm old, so I graduated college in 1985 with a degree in history at a time when the economy was really strong and company said, Hey, you're a smart kid who graduated from a good school and you're trained to do absolutely nothing. Come over here. We're going to pay you a decent white collar wage and we're going to teach you how to do the job. And as a result, I own a house in this amazingly expensive housing market that I bought 20 some years ago. In an up and coming neighborhood. In an up and coming neighborhood. And I feel a little bitter about the generation before me when they got those houses for a quarter of the price that I paid. But my God, you kids. Yeah. So the question, I mean, that we're talking about is why is getting out of poverty so hard? And a big part of it is you can't predict any of this. You can't plan around this. There is no decision making process you can make to change, first of all, where you're born again, which benefits you have right at the beginning. And then also what kind of economic climate you graduate into. I mean, the cost of college has increased by like 200% since I graduated and I'm still crushed by student debt a decade after graduation. College graduates are carrying more student loan debt than ever before. In total, 44 million Americans owe nearly one and a half trillion dollars. And on average, a 2016 graduate is on the hook for about $37,000 upon receiving that diploma. I don't even know how this generation is going to get. So do you have student debt? I do. How much? I have now, I think I'm down to like 11 grand, which I graduated from college with some amount that now seems relatively small in comparison to other people. I want to say I graduated with something like $70,000 in debt. $70,000. That's pretty small because I know I was an undergrad. And I worked the whole time. I paid for my summer classes in cash with money I made as a waitress. I like was constantly working. I mean, I was going to remind me where you went to college. Western Washington University. I went to a state school. And you still racked up $70,000. No one in my family knew that going to school out of state was more expensive. So I went to the school that had a teaching college, which is what I was going to do originally. And I mean, I paid as little as possible. It was as absolutely little as I could. Like my degree is twice as expensive because I couldn't pay for it upfront, which is another way that we keep people poor. But if we let you off the hook and forgave your loan, I mean, think about the moral hazard. You might go to college a whole second time. And this time, I- You might get a master's degree. And actually become a teacher, which is so low paying that you still couldn't afford to buy a house. I mean, that's the thing. You know, when you talk about like, what is the answer? Is it education? One thing I would say is it's not education as long as people can afford, you know, I mean, I told my partner one time that if our house was on fire, I would save the dog in one arm and my degree in the other because it's the two things that I love the most in the world because I'm so proud that I like to finish school. But God, it is so expensive. And so I think when we talk about getting out of poverty, it's really difficult because there's again, just so many different forces every step of that way. Like there's some other way that it's whittled away, right? Like if it's not healthcare costs, it's childcare. Or if you're, you know, people of my generation are starting to get the word and Goldies, I guess, too, is with being the sandwich generation, right? We're like, I guess we all kind of are in this where you have kids and parents, both of which you're caring for. And so that can like knock you down a bunch of different ways. Yeah. And you know, there's like, there's like little stuff. So my parents live in rural Oregon or they live in like Eugene and outside of Eugene. So after college, I could not move back home with them because if I did, I would not be able to work. Like what am I going to do? Like living out there. So I moved to Seattle because I got an internship again, a time I was very lucky. Someone gave me an unpaid internship in 2009. So also I was a cocktail waitress and also I was a barista. And also I took on a lot of odd jobs that year. But during that year, you know, when I was working bananas hard, just trying to like pay rent, stay afloat, my friends who had parents who lived in Seattle who are from Seattle, had a huge advantage just cause they had somewhere to crash for free. I did not have that. Right? You know, or they had parents who helped them out with rent. Like I earn more than my parents ever have now and I'm a freelancer. So like bracket your expectations and I pay my own health insurance and I'm just throwing money, heaping money at my student loans. And I'm still doing great. Like by my account because we like can go to dinner and it's fine and I'm able to save money, but it's, it's cause we're lucky. It's not because of any decisions we made. But when we talk about like who is poor, there's so much moralizing that goes into it. When I think we really need to be thinking a lot about luck circumstance and like who's born on third. And that's the biggest aspect of luck is how you're born, whether you're born poor, born middle class, born wealthy. Born white. Born white. Or born in a place where there's jobs once you get out of high school, you know? Right. Which was different back in the 1960s when you could be born into a small town in the Midwest and graduate high school and get a union job at the local factory where you were guaranteed a middle class wage and. And a pension. Right. And vacation and benefits and so forth. You know who knows a lot about this stuff? Our friend Felicia Wong from the Roosevelt Institute. So we thought we'd touch base with her about some of the metadata on poverty, what we can do and also whether or not we're even talking about this right. Hi, this is Felicia. Felicia, are you there? Hello, Nick. How are you? I'm great. How are you? Good. Hi, I'm Felicia Wong and I'm president and CEO of the Roosevelt Institute. So we have we have some questions today. We're talking about about the economy as we always do, but specifically how the economy is sort of rigged toward inequality and also sort of keeping people there. So can you talk to us a little bit about the past like four or five decades and how how we got here and what some of those decisions were? Well, I think part of the problem is that for many decades, at least since the 1980s, you know, we have thought about people in poverty as meeting certain kinds of programs, right? Food stamp programs, other kinds of TANF programs. And look, these kinds of programs in the poverty alleviation frame generally is really important. But in a way, these are kind of like band-aids. Like these are not the right policies because they are not really cures. And one of the other problems is that poverty isn't like a scratch or a bruise. We're talking about a really cancerous tumor and band-aids are really not the solution to the problem. So I think it's important to look at much deeper ways in which the structure of our economy is actually driving poverty. Right. And so, you know, Felicia, what I often say is that people are poor because they're not paid enough money. Right. Which seems really obvious. It's so simple. Yeah, it's really super simple in a capitalist economy. You know, you're not poor because you don't get food stamps. You're not poor because you didn't get rent assistance. You're poor because you didn't get paid enough money by your, almost certainly by your employer. To be clear, there are some people who don't have jobs. Sure. There are people who definitely in our society and to be fair, in every society can't actually take care of themselves and may not have the capacity to have a job. But that's a relatively small proportion of the people in our country who are struggling. The vast majority of people who are struggling actually do have jobs and are still poor. So how do we get there? Well, you know, I think one of the ways I like to think about this is the way like Martin Luther King thought about it. You know, his Poor People's Campaign from the mid 1960s really talked about, yes, he definitely talked about the number one thing was a meaningful job at a living wage for every employable citizen. And he talked about access to land and he talked about access to capital and he talked about, you know, the right to organize. So all of these things together are the things that actually our economy doesn't do well at providing for most people. And that is why people are poor, right? Some people have little or no capital. They have no hope of getting it in a capitalist economy, as you often say, Nick, as you just said, right? Some people live in places where work has totally disappeared, where there is no hope of work. You know, there remain, even in an economy that looks very bubbly, like our economy today, there remain neighborhoods where black men are still at 40% unemployment, right? Black men of working age. Some people who have jobs, they can't organize for better wages. Some people have no access to housing and no hope of getting housing. So these are all like very big problems. And again, not to denigrate food stamps. Food stamps are very important for many people, but that kind of approach is not what's going to get us out of poverty. So that's a long way of saying it. The short way of saying is we don't have the right policies, probably because we don't have the right analysis of what's wrong. I think lots of people currently think about markets as being these things that just operate perfectly by themselves, right? And that if a market is operating properly and government gets out of the way, then the supply curve and the demand curve are going to cross and that people will be paid what they're worth and that, you know, all people will be able to live a decent life. But actually, that is not the way markets work. Markets are structured to work for some people and not for other people. So that we talk a lot at Roosevelt about the rules that we need to structure markets so they actually do work properly. And one of the things that we see now, just by way of example, is that the increase in corporate power, for example, in our economy means that we have companies that are making tremendous numbers of profits, as you have said, Nick. But those profits are actually going right back to the executives who take those profits out of the company in the form of stock buybacks and they're not actually being transmitted back to workers in the form of wages. So that gets right back to where you started this conversation, Nick. People are poor because they are not being paid enough money. So what we need to then focus on are the rules that either allow people to do that or don't allow people to do that, the rules that would require paying a living wage or not. So I have a question then, and this is sort of a big question, but how do you get then from the market will fix itself to we have to step in or sort of ensure that this playing field is leveled? Well, you know, this is an answer you would expect from somebody like me because I run a think tank. But you have to look at the data, right? And here's one interesting statistic. All reduction in poverty has occurred through government action. It's government that reduces poverty rates. So 50 years ago, 1967, the poverty rate was 27% without tax credits and benefits. Today, that number is 16% if you include tax credit and benefits. And all of that is through government programs. This is based on some work that Jason Furman recently did. So you really have to look at the role that a number of government programs play in reducing poverty. And yet still, we have the kind of poverty rates, you know, that we were lamenting at the top of the hour. You know, the idea that we didn't say this, but you know, at some point, over half of all Americans will live in poverty. And my point is the way for us to get out of poverty is through government action. Some of that is through direct tax and transfers. And a lot of it, as we try to argue at Roosevelt, is actually through restructuring rules. So you don't have things like stock buybacks. And instead, you have things like higher wages. Yeah, absolutely. But Felicia, don't you think that the country's economy is at the point now where in many ways, I don't know how to say this, I don't mean to say that poverty isn't a problem, but it's almost becoming a second order problem as most people in the middle class become poor. Yes. Right. Like our language doesn't capture this very well because we only have one word for poverty, poor. Right. But most people think of themselves as middle class, right? Even people who earn well below the poverty line still consider themselves to be middle class. Yeah. Right. But frankly, we don't think about it that way at Roosevelt Relief for exactly the reason that you suggested, Nick, right? That because it's really not about a small fraction of poor people, it is really about the disenfranchisement and the lack of power and agency of the vast majority of Americans. And frankly, I think it's one of the reasons that Occupy took off in 2011 was because the tagline, we are the 99%, like that really resonated that, you know, mathematically, it is true that the 1% were pulling away from the 99%. But it also was true that even people at the 70th percentile, even people at the 80th percentile felt very insecure, right? They had too much debt. They didn't know how they were going to pay their kids school fees. They weren't sure, you know, about whether or not they'd be able to afford a vacation or a restaurant meal or any of the things that we think about as sort of the markers of, you know, a modest middle class life. So I think that one of the reasons that, at least for a while, we were talking about this as inequality was to try to capture, and I'm not sure that inequality, by the way, is the right political frame. Yeah. Because it feels very mathematical and like the economists love it, but like, inequality still doesn't feel very human. And I think what we need is an economy that works for people. And by the way, you know, a capitalism that works for more people, that's really what we ought to be focused on. But at any rate, you know, the poverty frame, which comes from the 1960s and 1970s, feels like it was an artifact of a time when like, most people were not in fact poor, and there was more equality of opportunity. And people could expect that their kids would do at least as well and probably better than they would and have an economic way to secure life. And poverty was about alleviating the pain. That's when programs like, whether it's Head Start or Food Stamp or whatever, they started in a period where we had to, we weren't looking at our whole economy, we were looking at people who for some reason, often because of race or gender, by the way, but for some reason were not able to fully partake in a market economy. The situation now is totally different. So the poverty frame right now kind of feels like, yes, alleviating poverty is really important, but actually fixing our the way our whole economy works, that's what's most important. I think once you you know, one of the things I found in writing and reporting is when you really like sort of loop people in and place them on the spectrum and sort of show how their experience puts them not as much maybe in the comfortable middle classes they would think or when you sort of show them the numbers or you sort of like loop them in, then everybody sort of feels a little bit poor a lot of the time. So I think there's sort of a pro and con there, but I think you know, poverty alleviation, like you said, at the very top, I think it lets a lot of the systems off the hook that create poverty and that create that precarious middle class. Like if you're only focused on food stamps, you're not focused on prison industrial complex, you're not focused on you know, out of control medical bills, you're not focused on all these other huge systems that keep people not just poor, but keep them out of that upper middle class American dream echelon. I think that's exactly right. But I think one of the most pernicious ideas that actually a lot of people on our side, lots of progressives have come to believe certainly neoliberals as that, you know, people are poor, people aren't paid enough because they're not well educated enough. And this is a super pernicious idea that is just objectively false. And that's not right. That is not true. That is not true. But it's this trap that you can get into, which is that it was which is to come to believe that the people at Walmart who are paid seven or eight bucks an hour are paid that because that's what they're worth, because that's all their educational attainment allows them to deserve. They didn't bother to, you know, try, right? Whatever. And it's a tricky area, because on the one hand, yay, more education is always better. And on the other hand, no, that's not why people are poor. And it's not why people are poorly paid. So if Felicia Wong was in charge of everything, what would the top three things be that she would do to fix this mess? Sorry to put you on the spot there. Oh, my gosh. Well, you know, I do a couple things, I would definitely think about ways to kind of right size and or right incentivize large companies and you know, kind of I would go in the direction of Elizabeth Warren's new kind of accountable capitalism bill, which talks about all kinds of ways in which very large companies need to actually be good corporate citizens. So that's one thing I would do. I think the second thing I would do is to really make sure that kids of all races have enough capital, enough potential to have some kind of wealth. So whether it's a kind of baby bonds or like something so that at the very beginning of your life, you start out with at least some fighting chance for opportunity. And then, you know, the third thing I would do, well, do I get can I have four? Yeah, you can have four. We're going to make a special exception for you. The first thing I would do is to and this is actually the hardest thing. I would absolutely desegregate our schools and our neighborhoods. I mean, I really you said I could be like, yeah, you can just impose your will on the world. I think that the idea that we are so divided geographically by race and as a corollary by income and or wealth is absolutely pernicious. So I would desegregate. And the last thing I would do is like, make sure that we have a democratic institution, small d not big deal, like actually have a functioning democracy, because I believe that only when people continue to have input and agency and voice in making all these decisions, only then would a system that you set up reasonably well from the beginning be able to have any fighting chance of self sustaining. So those are the four things I would do. That's really awesome. Those are very close to the four I wrote down. I wrote overturn citizens united and strengthen the Voting Rights Act as one. So I think we're on the same page there, Felicia. All right. You've got the legislation. I've got the principles. It's all the same. Yeah. All right. Well, Felicia, thank you so much for spending a few minutes with us chatting about this stuff. It's great to talk to you. Great to talk to you. Thanks so much to both of you. So as Felicia pointed out, most of the gains in reducing poverty over the past 50 years has come from federal programs, from transfers and subsidies. But even after that, we still have 16% of Americans living in poverty, which of course is a disgrace in the wealthiest country on earth with an unemployment rate of only 14%. But that that 16% number, even that still understates the problem. Today, one third of Americans are housing cost burdened and that they pay over 30% of their income in rent. Nearly half of families say they have no retirement savings at all. And 78% of Americans report that they are living paycheck to paycheck with 44% saying that they couldn't even cover a $400 emergency expense. Clearly, it's not just the very poor who are struggling. So are the bulk of the American middle class. And of course, all of these numbers are much, much worse for people of color and for children. So that broadly is the problem. The solution, I think we all agree is to raise wages. And again, getting back to Felicia's point, that's going to require the government. But the broader point is this is about much more than addressing the needs of the very poor. Most of the poor are working poor. And that means the working middle class. So maybe we should try to define poverty, which isn't as simple as it at first seems. So there's actually two kinds of poverty. There's absolute poverty, and relative poverty, absolute poverty. A lot of people have a good idea of what that is. It's actually being below subsistence, not having enough food, not having shelter, not being able to keep warm in the winter, etc. The basic subsistence elements of life. And then there's what we can call relative poverty. And you often hear this critique from the right that, oh, Americans aren't poor. These are the richest poor people in history. Wait, and they have phones and running water. Air conditioning. Right. But back in my day, poor people slept on the ground. Right. And you know what, in my day, some poor people still do sleep on the ground a lot more than they used to. So we're failing on both counts. We're failing on, as you can see, the explosion of homelessness throughout the country in Seattle, San Francisco, really everywhere. The homeless population in the United States is on the rise for the first time since the Great Recession. And then there's also relative poverty, which speaks to the growing inequality in this nation. And it is not a fictional thing to say that growing inequality, even if you have that subsistence level, you're not poor because you have a TV set and a cell phone. Because in the modern technological economy we have today, Nick, you actually need things like cell phones and Internet and so forth just to participate in this economy. Right. Can you imagine applying for a job without the Internet? Yeah. But yeah, to your point, Goldie, so the federal poverty line to define it is $24,600 for a family of four, which first of all is bonkers low. But not only that, that means that a family earning $25,000 with a family of four is not considered poor. So when we talk about like, who is poor, quote unquote, there's a very distinct category of people, something like 16% of Americans, which is still like 40 million Americans or something like that, who are considered poor, quote unquote, based on their earning. But I would argue that a family of four earning $30,000 a year is still poor. Like, you're pretty poor. And this is not just an arbitrary line because the poverty line determines what benefits you qualify for. Yeah. If you go a dollar above, you know, and it depends, it goes state by state and it also goes by how many dependents you have and all this kind of thing. But I mean, there's a lot of people who are really struggling to pay for their groceries, to put gas in their car and all that kind of thing, but who also are not considered poor enough, again, quote unquote, for these benefits. Yeah. And part of the goofiness of this number is that while a family who earns $25,000 or $30,000 a year in a tiny rural town where housing costs approach zero, they're not rolling in dough, but surely they can at least house and feed themselves. But a family of four earning $24,600 a year in a city in the United States of America, certainly a city like Seattle or Portland or San Francisco or LA, they are like way poor because you can't even get a one bedroom apartment in a place like Seattle for $2,000 a month. No, no, no, I was just looking at the national income housing at the out of reach data that they do every year. It was just looking at this today and you have to earn something like $27 an hour to earn a one bedroom in Seattle, which is almost twice $15 minimum wage, which is then a hell of a lot more than $25,000 a year. For a family of four. For a family of four. But if you're earning, again, $30,000 in Seattle, you're pretty damn poor. And you still are not necessarily eligible for a lot of different kinds of benefits. And so it's not as though, you know, one of the things that people who have not been poor or not recently been poor, well, sort of part of the mythologizing they do is that, you know, people stay poor so that they can get all those like sweet, sweet benefits. So they can get that free orca card. Oh, it's so good. Not realizing like how low you have to be to get that stuff. It's not like you have a dope life and also you get a free orca card. It's you have a very difficult life. And congrats. Maybe you get a free orca card. Yeah. You can now go to your third job. Yeah. Remind us what an orca card is. Oh, sorry. That's the bus pass we have here. It's yeah. So in King County, you have the bus pass. And if you're like a senior or you're poor, you're a teenager, you can get a reduced cost. Below that poverty line, you get a- It's our version of a MetroCard, New York. Okay. Right. Now I understand. And to be clear that already low poverty line, the vast majority of the people who fall below that are working poor. These are not just people, you know, welfare queens or kings or I don't know what the non-gendered equivalent of that is. There isn't one. We only talk about women in that way. Don't worry about it. Don't worry. You're pretty ahead about that. Yeah. Welfare Steve's is what I'll be calling it. These are mostly working poor and that means they are poor not because they don't have jobs. But Nick, you know this lie because they're not paid enough. Yeah. I mean, if you think about, I mean, I think this is something we've come back to a million times, right? Is that if you work full time, you should be able to live period. You should be able to live. You should be able to rent a place. You should be able to end the idea that not only our wages, like the bottom, the floor of wages, not in any way tied to cost of living is already difficult. But we have become so skewed in what we think of as like what people should earn. Like we all were around for the fight for 15 where people were like $15 an hour. That's so much money. 40 hours a week, $15 an hour is not enough money to rent an apartment in Seattle. Yeah. Thus it's not that much money. Right. Yeah. And so we, I mean, we pulled up some numbers earlier and it was like of the working age individuals, the people who were poor, but didn't work. It was because almost 20% were disabled. 10% were in school. A lot of them were taking care of somebody else. Only something like 5% were not working and poor. Like that was the intersect. Like it's very few. Most people have a job at some point. They either do seasonal labor. For example, one of the biggest seasonal employers is the stadiums. So people will work seasonally with the stadiums. People do holiday. They do fulfillment for Amazon. They do like any number of things. Yeah. One of the really interesting things about the federal poverty numbers are that we, you know, the country is, as far as I know has always had one number which describes the poverty level. And that number made a ton more sense during a time when the difference between living in the, in a rural place versus a city was smaller. Yeah. And clearly we live in a time, particularly right now in our nation's history where the difference between living in rural Oklahoma and housing yourself and living in urban Seattle or Chicago or New York and housing yourself is just exponentially different. And so as you consider that number and think about the number of people who are officially poor, and then you connect that with data like nearly half of American households are one emergency away from either homelessness or poverty. It begins to give you a sense for how the official number really doesn't tell the story. Right. Because if half the country is one emergency away from economic crisis and 16% is poor. There's a lot of people. And yeah, who effectively are poor, but we don't call them poor because we've just as, you know, just as a matter of policy identified a number and just sort of put it out there as the number. And I think that our work on inequality and, you know, just talking to people exposes how inaccurate that number is and how incomplete a way it is to understand the dimensions of the problem. We live in a society in an economy where while the official rate of poverty may be 16% and the official cutoff for being poor is $24,600 for a family of four, that really doesn't tell the story of what's going on in the country. That in fact a huge proportion of our fellow Americans are either poor or an inch away from becoming poor. And the problem isn't that a few people don't have jobs and are poor. The problem is that most of us do have jobs and are still poor because we're not paid enough money. And I think that inequality may not be exactly the right frame within which to litigate these issues, but poverty for sure isn't that we don't, the country doesn't mostly have a poverty problem. It mostly has a wages problem. So, what you're talking about is adopting a much more ambitious frame. Not a poverty frame. It's not about people talk about how everybody should have a living wage. We need to move from this idea of a living wage, which is a subsistence idea, to a middle class wage. In the richest country on earth, our ambition is for everybody who has a job to be able to afford a decent, dignified middle class lifestyle. And I think defining what middle class looks like and what people can expect as a middle class person. I think people don't even know what it is acceptable and appropriate for them to expect anymore from a life that is considered to be middle class. And I think one of the only ways that we can do anything about it is also just show how much bigger it is than food stamps. I think one of the things that Felicia mentioned is in addition to raising wages generally, we also have to give people a better voice in our democracy and make voting more accessible and make people feel more connected to their local lawmakers and generally be involved citizens to feel like they have some control over this. Because I think hugely what I have seen among people is a feeling of a loss of control over their future, over what they can do. A loss of agency. Yeah, just at the mercy of whatever rich dudes do next. And you can't ever really be middle class if you live in constant fear of falling out of the middle class. Or of your children not being able to stay in the middle class. I mean, I think true middle class life means not having to think about this shit all the time. Right. Like I really think that's the goal. Like if you can just like buy groceries and not think about it, you're middle class. I think you've nailed it, Hannah. Had a lot of time to think about this stuff. Thanks Hannah for coming back to the office for a day and giving us a little well needed perspective. It was great. On the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we're going to take a look at pay equity. Why women still only make 80% of what men do and what we might do about it. If you have any questions, comments or suggestions for future episodes or guests, please send them to us at pitch at pitchforkeconomics.com and we'll try to address it in an upcoming episode. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L-A-R-J media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and follow our writing on Medium at Civic Con Quirks and you should also follow Nick Hanauer on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always, a big thank you to our guests and thank you to our team at Civic Ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach Silk, Jasmine Weaver, Jessen Farrell, Stephanie Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul Constant, Nick Cassella and Annie Fadley. Thanks for listening.