 Real quick before we get to the show, we wanted to take a second to make sure that you've heard about a new podcast from the hosts of The Majority Report. It's Majority FM's AM Quickie and it's the morning news podcast for progressives in the know. Each morning, Sam Seder and comedian Lucy Steiner bring you the overlooked, underrated, and the otherwise forgotten stories that are essential to things like fighting capitalism, taking back democracy, and building a more equitable society, which is all stuff we love, and even better, it's all in five minutes before you're even out the door. In the lukewarm world of NBR and CNN, Majority FM's AM Quickie lays out the day's headlines with some heat, letting progressives know how to navigate the endless news cycle while knowing what's right. Go to amquickie.com to subscribe on your favorite podcast platform today and brace yourself because here comes the intro music. One of the things that a Nordic person, I think, notices quickly when you come to America, how much Americans talk about freedom. But the longer I lived in the United States and the more I observed the life around me, it didn't seem to me that Americans were actually that free. I look at the Finnish model and I say, free healthcare, free daycare, good public schools, free college, and long-term care when you get old. That's the type of market capitalism for me. And you know, none of these things are out of reach for Americans. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. A pointed conversation about who gets what and why with one of America's most provocative capitalists. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. So Nick, back in, oh, was it like May of 2014 when you first had me into the office to talk about working with you? Was it that long ago? That long ago, good God. You brought me on board, as you explained it to me, to help you with your mission to redefine capitalism. But when I talk to people about the stuff we're working on and the things we support that we want some sort of healthcare, universal healthcare for everybody, we want to raise wages, we want to tax the rich, we want a high minimum wage, we want high overtime protections, we want affordable housing, they tell me that that's... We're advocating for a socialist hellscape. Let's tell the truth. Are you some sort of secret socialist? It's such an interesting question and it's so pertinent today. I think you raise a really good point because we're not socialists. I'm certainly not a socialist and I really do strongly believe that the principal lesson of the 20th century was that markets work and non-market societies don't, that there's no example on planet earth where a society moved away from markets and it succeeded in any sort of measurable way. But saying that markets work is not the same thing as saying our current market system works as well as it can. Exactly. Like I've said many times, capitalism comes in as many flavors as pie and dirt pie tastes terrible and cherry pie tastes great and we... Maybe you prefer a pecan pie. Yeah, right. People are different but we definitely get to choose the form of market economy that we have and we have both the right and responsibility to choose a good form, a good flavor. But I do think it's worth just pausing for a second and reminding folks why we are so certain that socialism doesn't work. Let's define this because this paucity of terms we have, it hurts us on both sides. It says there's capitalism, this thing called capitalism which is markets and freedom, hooray, America first. Yeah, that's fair. Right. Right. And that's it. That's the only kind of thing there is. Right. And we lump in affordable healthcare with Stalinist death camps, right? Let's make a technical distinction between socialism in the Soviet sense which is... Yeah, or the Venezuelan sense. We think of it as a communist country where the state owns most of the means of production and there is no private property. Right. There are no markets. Right. And the state is setting all the prices and assigning all the wages and so forth. It's complete top-down control. That's not the same thing as a social democracy. Correct. It's a social welfare state, a mixed economy which is largely a market economy in which most industries, most businesses are privately held and privately run and there's private property, but there are some basic things like healthcare, education, not just K-12, but colleges and universities, daycare, things that are provided by the state often outside of the market and guaranteed to all citizens. That's not socialism. Honestly, by emphasizing the state-provided services as the distinction, we actually don't acknowledge the important difference which is that a laissez-faire market system basically can do nothing but eat itself. It will create massive economic inequality and will collapse from within. And what other countries utilizing market systems have done is they have constrained the market systems in ways that both encourage and to a certain extent guarantee that the outcomes will be distributionally reasonable and therefore more stable. And more to the point where the outcomes of the market economy are not so egregiously unjust that you have to spend a shit-ton of government money making up the difference. When I think about a market economy that makes sense, I'm not thinking about an economy that actually includes government-provided services at scale, although I do agree that in many cases that this is the best and most efficient way to do it, like public education and almost certainly like healthcare to a certain extent. But what I do think of is a set of rules and norms governing the market economy to make it work in a way that works for everyone. Our system actually isn't capitalist, it's socialism for the rich. There are some very clear ways in which socialism does not and cannot work to provide prosperity for human societies. And that is that while socialism is really good at solving the distributional problems in an economy, but what that arrangement cannot do is create more prosperity. Right? At least not as well as the market. Because markets are an incredibly effective way of generating new solutions to human problems. As we've said before, it's an evolutionary system that evolves new solutions to human problems. So to sum this up, just for folks listening, if you're one of those libertarians who hate government programs or you're somebody who knows one of those libertarians that hates government programs, to be clear, Medicare for all is not socialism. If the US had Medicare for all, we would have a market economy with universal healthcare. Correct. So this brings us, of course, to the theme of this episode is, well, we're saying re-imagining capitalism, making the case that there are different kinds of capitalism. And one of the places where there's a different kind of capitalism that people in the US often like to say, oh, that's socialism. You don't want to go to that socialist hellhole is, well, the Nordic countries. That's right. And one of the best examples of the Nordic countries is Finland. And today we do get to chat with a couple of people who are calling us from that socialist hellscape. Well, oddly, it's warmer and sunnier than it is here in Seattle right now. Yeah. So today we get to talk to Trevor Courson and Anu Partinen about what it's like to live in Finland, which parenthetically in 2017 was ranked the most stable, the safest, the best governed country in the world. It's also the third wealthiest, the third least corrupt, and the second most socially progressive and finally the third most socially just. So somehow, somehow not socialist hellhole as they wrote in the New York Times, Finland is a capitalist paradise. My name is Anu Partinen. I'm a writer and I'm the author of the Nordic Theory of Everything in Search of a Better Life, which is a book that compares the United States and the Nordic countries and what life looks like in these countries. And I'm Trevor Courson. I'm married to Anu Partinen, the most important thing you need to know about me. And I am also an author. I have written for the New York Times, The Atlantic. I've written two books. I'm a science writer as well as a literary journalist. And I have most recently been teaching American Studies and Writing at Columbia University in New York City, where we lived for 10 years before we moved to Finland. I've got a question right off the bat after reading your piece in the New York Times. How do I immigrate to Finland? I get that so much. Just today, I was talking to a group of American college students who are visiting Finland and I met them here in Helsinki and they were immediately asking me how to immigrate to Finland. And all I can say is, well, it's not easy. Unfortunately, Finland is a little bit like other European countries. They don't make it easy. But for the students, luckily, I could tell them that a lot of Finnish universities these days have English language programs. And I think it's reasonably easy to come here as a student. So they have hope. How about as a political refugee? Because we'll see what happens in the 2020 election. I don't know how welcome I'll be afterwards. So we're so delighted to get to talk to you guys. Our podcast, as you know, is devoted to all things economic and in particular, trying to help people understand the ways in which the American framework of economics and what we call neoliberalism in particular, the ways in which that has imprisoned us and reduced our happiness and prosperity in all sorts of ways. And in particular, the ideas that we take for granted sort of, you know, it's the water we swim in that, you know, neoliberalism as a meaning system has infected every part of American life. And most people, they don't even recognize it's there. But in particular, we were really drawn to the way in which you folks describe freedom, a different form of freedom. Right. And the liberal and neoliberalism is from liberty. It's all about making us free and maximizing personal freedom and liberty. And yet you make the argument that actually the Finns are more free. Explain to the American audience why. Well, for my part, this is basically the whole lens that I look through in my book, The Notic Theory of Everything. And so the book started when I moved to the United States. I'm originally from Finland and I grew up in Finland and then I moved to the United States and I started looking at the, you know, American life around me and thinking about it and trying to figure out my own place in the society. And one of the things that a Nordic person, I think, notices quickly when you come to America how much Americans talk about freedom. And we don't really talk about it that much here. And at first it was strange to me. It seemed a little, I'll be honest, it sounded a little pompous because in the Nordic countries we're pretty, I don't know if modest is the right word, but we don't really use big words and so on. But the more I thought about it, the more I thought that that's fantastic. Of course, freedom is what we all want from life and every society should really aim for freedom. So I really started to appreciate the fact that Americans really are so engaged with it and talk about it so much. But then the contradiction was that the longer I lived in the United States and the more I observed the life around me, it didn't seem to me that Americans were actually that free. And it certainly didn't seem to me that Americans were living a freer life, if you will, than the people I had known in the Nordic countries. And so that was the starting point of my book. And the basic idea that I came to, and when I was researching the book, I discovered was that the way the Nordic countries have created these universal social policies that provide every child, every person with good education or healthcare or parents with paid parental leaves and so on, these are not some sort of collective socialist systems that take away your independence or are gifts from the government to you. They're in fact services that really support everybody's independence and freedom so that you're free to actually fulfill your potential regardless of who your parents are. And you're free to have family and career. And you're free to not worry about constantly how you're going to pay for health insurance or whether it's going to cover you. So that was one of the big discoveries for me when I moved to the United States to realize that there's many ways of achieving freedom. And I think today the United States, the way the society is organized, doesn't actually really support people's freedom every day. We're free in theory. Yeah. And our definition of freedom is freedom from constraint. But what you're really talking about is a different, and I think in our opinion, much better definition of freedom, which is capabilities. You know, it's well and fine to be theoretically free of constraint. But if you live in a libertarian hellscape where the only people in the society who have power are a small group of economic elites and your life essentially is constrained by that and you're consigned to a life of limits in poverty, you're not super free. Right? I think they can make a distinction. I think absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Make a distinction. You and I are equally free to fly on a private jet. The difference is you're at liberty to fly on a private jet and I only get to fly on it if you invite me on your jet. And that sounds like an odd sort of situation, but it's throughout our lives you have more liberty than I do because you have money. I'm curious, Trevor, your take as an American in Finland, is your impression the same? Well, I was one of those fish swimming in the sea of Americans' versions of freedom, not knowing what I was missing. And meeting Anu and learning about her thinking has really dramatically changed the way I perceive how my life was in the United States, even while we were still living there. We lived there for 10 years together before just moving to Finland recently. She has this line in her book where she says one of the ways to think about this is that the freedom you have in Finland, for example, or any country that has good public social services is freedom from false hope, which I just think is such an interesting way to phrase it because in the US I am from a very privileged background. And yet the social set that I am part of, even all of those people, and myself included, suffer from really debilitating stresses and anxieties all the time. And even if it's the fear that your kid's not going to get into the right high-end private school, the whole set of things behind that is that we lack any kind of middle class anymore with a decent life where people can have the freedom to live the life they want to. Instead, we're all in this pressure cooker trying to compete, trying to keep our heads above water. It's an arms race. Yeah. And the false hope part is that there's this huge industry of self-help and everybody's constantly trying to find the way that they can calm down and relax, whether it's meditation or yoga or mindfulness. And that's not the problem. Those aren't the solutions. I mean, maybe they help. But the false hope that we all suffer from, and not to mention people who are less privileged, that we can rise above this against all odds. I mean, all these tales of heroism. And it's so interesting now moving to Finland where people don't talk and think about this stuff that much, as Anu said. But from my perspective as an American, looking, for example, at Anu's Finnish friends here, something she's pointed out too, is they seem so relaxed and free compared to the equivalently positioned people that we know in the United States who are really stressed out all the time. And it's not that their quality of life is bad or that they're missing out on opportunity. They have good jobs. They have wonderful lives. They can afford to buy things. They're just really relaxed and enjoying life. Yeah. And I think that my own experience is that the more inequality there is in a society, the farther the rungs of the ladder of opportunity are stretched apart, and the more panicked people become about moving from rung to rung or moving down a rung. Anu, in your book, you talk about the logistics of everyday life and the difference between making your way through life in America on a daily basis, how complicated and stressful it is, as opposed to what it's like in Finland. If you could provide an example, I think the audience would appreciate that. Well, I think there's just many things in your daily life, especially if you have a family in the United States that are complicated and require you to do research and visits. And you just think of choosing a good daycare for your kid or choosing a good school for your kid. I was just amazed when I started to learn that, you know, Trevor's family or friends, that they would do so much research. They would ask around friends. They would visit multiple schools. They would interview the teachers. And they were really stressed out whether they're going to find this good school and can they trust that it's a good school for their kid? And then can they get in and they're filling out these like paperwork and taking part in lotteries? And, you know, I remember a friend was they were applying for a private school that they're going to pay for a lot of money. And still there was this system where you had to get your application in on a certain day and everybody's really stressed out that that is the male going to get it or do I have to take it in in person? And all this just seemed to me that people have to spend so much time just figuring all this out. And then they're constantly stressed out about it and then multiply this by researching your health insurance and researching college and filling out college applications. And I also thought that, well, this is really anxiety inducing because it's also hard. Like if you don't have the even if you're a highly educated person, you still struggle to fill in the forms or understand the health care bills or whatnot you get in America. So it's complicated. It takes up your time. You're really anxious about it. But I often thought of also like that just a simple American truth that time is money. Like how much time every individual spends on this people who could be doing something much more valuable with their time, whether it's just hanging out with their kids or going to a baseball game or working at the actual job and thinking about that. If we had a system where these basic things that everybody needs, everybody needs daycare for their child, everybody needs a school for their child, everybody needs health care. If we just figured out a way where, you know, it's taken care of for you. And I feel like in a Nordic country, there's certainly debate on how to best arrange these services and so on. But you can also make the argument that if you have a government that is specialized in figuring out how are we going to arrange the best health care system for all these people, then there's going to be hired people who are specialized and they do that. And not every individual who doesn't even understand the system. So that to me also seemed like this doesn't make any sense that we force everybody to be stressed out and spend all this time and energy on these things. What was the experience like finding daycare for your daughter in Finland? Well you fill in an application. I don't even remember anymore. I think it was so simple or maybe I send in an email and an application and you kind of figure out the ones that are closest to your home or whatnot, you, you know, list them and then you get a letter saying which one your child got into. Every child has a right to a spot in a public daycare center in Finland. So it's not a question of whether you get a spot. The place we got is like seven minutes from our home and it's fantastic. It's truly wonderful. They do so many things there and we're constantly just amazed at what our daughter already learns and what the days are like. Having said that, sure, some, you know, neighborhoods all of a sudden have a lot of kids and they don't have enough daycare centers and so people get a spot further away and they're unhappy because they have to take the tram. Exactly. And of course it can be annoying but most people then, you know, you apply next year again and maybe you get a spot closer to you. But it's still extremely easy and we pay the maximum. It's for the whole country, there's like a maximum amount that anybody is allowed to be charged and it's 280 euros at the moment, about maybe 290 euros, so about 300 dollars. And then it's still on a sliding scale that if you make less money, you pay less. But we are fortunate enough to be in the highest paying group and we pay 300 euros. So there's this quote that we grabbed from your book that I really loved that I think describes this, but particularly getting at this notion of freedom, which is that, you know, the nautical has been to free the individual from all forms of dependency within the family and in civil society, the poor from charity, wives from husbands, adult children from parents and elderly parents from children. The express purpose of this freedom is to allow all of those human relationships to be unencumbered by ulterior motives and needs. And that allows us to be entirely free, completely authentic and driven purely by love. I think it's a wonderful way to express how useful these policies are for promoting true happiness and freedom and why that distinction, why the lives of people are so different and you know, driven by these different policies. But this is an economics podcast. I'd love to get into some of the economics just so we can be clear. Your piece in The New York Times was titled Finland is a Capitalist Paradise. Let's talk about the economy in Finland. It is a market economy fully, right? It is, yes. And like, you know, what is a market economy fully? It is in a sense that there's private ownership, there's private businesses, there's free markets. It's very, Finland's economy is very exports oriented. So Finland is very much part of the global trade and in fact dependent on it. So you see less of the kind of movement towards trade wars or whatnot you see in the United States because I think Finland has a small country and that's very focused on global trade. Everybody kind of agrees that global trade is a good thing. So it is certainly very much a free market economy. You have all the same brands. You can buy whatever you want. So it's not at all what many Americans might think that, oh, they're those, I don't know, poor socialist countries who probably come by Coke or whatnot. But at the same time, so the basic difference is that we just have a government that provides some basic, vital universal social services for everyone. And then apart from that, businesses do their thing and sell their products just like in America. And the cost, what are you paying in taxes? Yeah, that's a really interesting question. I think I often encounter that in America, many people still think that everybody in a Nordic country pays like 70% of their wages in taxes and that's not at all true. Not at all. For me, one of the surprising things also is that when I moved to America, we lived in New York City and in New York City you have federal tax, state tax, city tax. And for three years I had to do my taxes both in Finland and in the United States. So I could actually see that with the same income what my tax rate was. And it was basically the same. A few years I would have paid a little bit less in Finland because let's remember I wasn't making huge amounts of money. So the difference really is that in America, if you're a wealthy person making a lot of money, you probably pay less taxes than you would in Finland. Or if you live in a state like Texas or somewhere where you don't necessarily have state tax or city tax, then maybe you pay less of your income in taxes, but overall in America many people in big cities pay just as much of their wages in taxes as people in Finland do. So it's not that the burden on individual is that much higher. Certainly in Finland, for example, consumption is taxed a little differently. So gas is more expensive in Finland or maybe some, I don't know, a laptop might be more expensive in Finland. But that doesn't mean that people can't afford to buy these things if you go to any house in Finland, people have their Macs or laptops or iPhones. So in that sense it's similar. But it's just we all pay somehow. And Americans pay for health insurance on top of their taxes. They pay for daycare on top of their taxes. They pay for their college on top of their taxes. Whereas the way Nordic society in Finland is organized, we pay taxes and then we get the services in return. And I think for most people that's a better deal. And I would argue that even for extremely wealthy people who in the United States certainly probably end up paying less tax than they would in a Nordic country, I would say that the Nordic country still or model could be a better deal. Because A, you're kind of relieved of those pressures that we talked about earlier. You don't have to spend all that time worrying whether a kid is getting into the best school because if they don't get into the best school they're going to fall down a ladder and then, oh my God. So you can also live less stress free life. And I'll be honest that for me at least, I think it's a selfish thing also to think that I want to live in a society where there's not homeless people sleeping in the doorways of these luxury stores that sell $5,000 handbags. And I just feel like I think most Nordic people, even the wealthy people, are happy to pay those taxes to feel like they live in a society that actually provides equality of opportunity for everyone. And then you can feel like, okay, I've earned my success. Because one of the things I was surprised by in America as well, there's a lot of talk of privilege and a lot of people feeling kind of guilty about their privilege. And things don't really talk about that much. Like, of course in Finland too, some child is in better position than another one for sure. You know, maybe parents in some family are alcoholics or whatnot. This happens always. But because the society overall works hard to provide equal opportunity for all children, then you don't have to constantly feel like, oh, but I had such advantages growing up that actually my success maybe is not my success. So I'm curious, Trevor, you came from New York, very cosmopolitan city, people from all over the world there. The US is not as homogenous as Finland. Do you think it could work here? A couple of things to say about that. One is that it's a really interesting moment to be moving from New York to say a place like Finland because as an American, I really feel, and I know you guys are thinking a lot about this question of the sort of the stories we've told ourselves as Americans over the past decades about, you know, if we raise taxes, it'll ruin investment and wealth and growth and make life worse for everyone. And I think this is an incredibly interesting time to move to a Nordic country from the US because I've come to feel that the Nordic countries are the living, breathing proof that what we've been telling ourselves in the US is wrong. And the only reason we've been able to ignore the Nordic countries is because of all this talk about how they're, well, they're the socialist in any states, they're basically communist. You know, part of what we've been trying to say is like, no, actually, they're these quite cosmopolitan, very interesting capitalists that are doing really well using policies that we're told can't work. And capitalism has only done better here as a result. And on the homogeneity question, one thing to say is that Nordic countries are quite heterogeneous now. They're more, I think, foreign born people in Sweden now than there are in the United States. And Helsinki, where we are, is rapidly becoming much more international just in the past 10 years. So I'm really excited to be living here right now. We hear this a lot that, oh, well, these Nordic countries are these homogenous white Christian monocultures and they're all altruistic. And that's the only reason it works. And it would never work in the United States. And there's a couple of underlying assumptions there. One of them is that a white Christian monoculture contains no divisions between people or no disagreements. And one of the things we wanted to do in our article was tell the story of Finland's history quickly because there was a terrible civil war. 35,000 people were killed. There was mass murder. Finns were slaughtering each other in the streets over economic injustice. And it's the legacy of that that has partly inspired the current system and the way it works. And there are constant disagreements in Finland politically between different political parties, between classes over this stuff. People here fight with each other and scream and yell at each other all the time. The idea that these are somehow harmonious altruistic societies is a complete myth. And the reason it works is because people have a, they understand that their self-interest is built into having the system work, even though people have disagreements. And so that's one underlying assumption here that we need to examine. Another one is kind of an extension of that, which is that you only by being altruistic or communitarian could we have good public services, for example. Could we have, you know, no one will agree to it in the United States because nobody's that selfless. Everybody's more selfish in the United States. Well, the whole point here is that all of these public services, for example, universal health care, universal good public schools, they're incredibly much in everyone's self-interest because as we've just been describing, our own personal lives are so much better as a result. We have a very selfish interest in wanting to live in this system. So it doesn't require altruism. You actually get a better deal, a much better deal for your money, whether it's taxes or, you know, deductibles or premiums you're paying to a private health insurance company. We're spending far more money in the United States, as you well know, than they do here. So it's a better deal for selfish reasons. It's just much more efficient to solve these problems collectively than organizing them. The public schools, yeah, we have a young kid, you know, and we're thinking about schools and there's an education expert that Anu quotes in her book who puts it really well. He said, oh yeah, there's school choice in Finland too. You can choose any public school you want. They're all excellent. Right. End of story. Right. Exactly. Do you have any business people? Have you talked to business people there about the benefits to business? For example, not having to be in the health insurance business as every business in the US is? Well, for my book, I have one chapter on entrepreneurship and the basic idea of that chapter was that in the United States, I often would hear when I would talk about Nordic countries, people would say that, well, that's all good and well, sure, you have a good quality of life. It's probably nice for all of you to have long paid, you know, summer vacations and paid parental leave. But that means that you don't have any innovation. You don't have successful businesses. I mean, make one brand that comes from a Nordic country, which always was kind of funny to me because well, you look at Ikea or H&M or Spotify or Skype or Minecraft or Angry Birds or all these services that Americans use that come from the Nordic countries. But I think a lot of Americans just don't know that they come from the Nordic countries. But so the book chapter, basically, I went around the Nordic countries and different countries talking to companies that are competing globally and successful, small and large, and asked them that, well, how is it possible that you have a successful company that's competing at the American market while all your employees are constantly out of their paid parental leave or their paid vacation or you have to pay tax, which is what Americans would ask that, you know, it's not possible to run a profitable business. And what these, you know, HR directors or CEOs would just tell me that, look, it's the job of the government to provide the basic infrastructure, to make sure that we have a society where people can do the jobs and then the business can do what it does. And then it's the government's rule to set reasonable boundaries and regulations so that the playing field is level. But overall, I think people in the Nordic countries, everybody doesn't agree. But I think mostly businesses see the benefits of having the government to be in the business of providing health insurance. Could you remind us what the paid vacation, paid family leave policies are in Finland? So in Finland, the typical amount is five weeks of paid vacation for everyone, regardless of who your employer is. It's just universal and mandated. It depends, of course, a little bit the first year you get four weeks and so on, but this is mandated. In Finland, parental leave, it's about a little bit less than a year, is paid based on your salary so you get a certain percentage. It varies a little at first. It's 90 percent, then it's maybe 70 percent of your salary that you get throughout that time. And that's available to both parents, or either parents, I should say, not both, but either they can choose it and divide it as they will. And then after that, you can still stay home without losing your job, but then you just get a small stipend for another two years. Now the big difference, and good to remember, is that this is also taxpayer funded. So it's not the business. It's not your employer who pays you salary for the whole time that you are on paid leave. All employers and all employees pay into basically a pay a tax, into an insurance fund, if you will, and the money comes out of there. So for the employer, typically they just then hire someone else to do the job for a year, and they're not stuck at paying two salaries. So that's really important, I think, to remember. And small business, of course, it's also important that they're not stuck at paying somebody's salary while they're away. Right. Wow. That sounds like such a socialist hellscape. We have a question that we ask everybody we interview, and you can answer together or separately. Why do you do the work you do? Well, I feel like as a writer, I want to try to find something that I can give to the world that I can provide. And for me, right now, or for the past several years, the fact that I had lived in the United States for 10 years, I'm now also an American citizen, and that I come from an Nordic country is something unique that I have sold. That's why I had chosen to put my efforts into writing and discussing and thinking about those differences. I guess I feel as an American, as someone who grew up in the US and has family and friends there, I'm just really worried about where we are headed. I think we are possibly headed for very bad civil strife, possibly. And what frustrates me about the conversation and a lot of the people I'm in touch with back in the US is how it's so hard for us in the US to conceive of this very sensible middle ground that we're living as a reality here in Finland. Whereas in the US, we're stuck with these narratives about freedom or communism, basically. And the reality is everybody thinks that the mainstream in the US has to be centrist and is centrist, and that's the only really viable area. And having known Anu, I feel like I need to read her book at least once a year to keep reminding myself of all the amazing insights about the US. But the idea that we're centrist is nuts. We're far to the right. We've all become completely convinced that anything that's good for anybody and that can help save our capitalist system in the United States is some form of communism or something is just ludicrous. And I feel so frustrated that I want to help try to do what little I can from our perch here in Finland right now to say, hey, everybody, wake up. Our American US system is really in danger, and we need new stories about how to understand who we are. And I think Anu's book does that, and anything I can do to try to help my friends and family back home see other possibilities for thinking about the way we live our lives, I hope can be helpful. Well, the good news from the Finnish example is that after we in the US fight our coming civil war, there's hope that we can adopt a more sane and humane system like Finland did. Well, that was obviously part of the subtext of ours. That's a very, Finn's a very pessimistic people often in many ways. I would commend you for a very Finnish lesson that you took from our article. Well, thank you guys so much for spending the time chatting with us. Thanks for having us. It was an honor. Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Bye. Bye. Goldy, I visited Helsinki for a few days a couple of years ago for the slush conference, which is this giant European tech conference where I gave a speech. And I had just a blast there. And I got to meet all these really interesting people, got to have dinner with the president and the place is just so shiny and clean and well organized and prosperous and pretty. And I know, you know, like it's super far north. It's supposed to be dark all the time, but of course the economy has nothing to do with that. No. Okay. But here's the thing is it was like, it was like clear and sunny and it was just a magically gorgeous place filled with what looked like very happy people. And I think the interview that we just had with these people reflects that reality. Right. You know, after talking to Anu and Trevor and having read Anu's book, The Nordic Theory of Everything, which I highly recommend, go out and buy it, read it. I've got a confession to make, Nick. I think I'm a secret Nord. Is that the... You don't look like a Nord. Is that the noun? No, think about this, Nick. You know me. You've known me for about five years now. The Finns and the Nords, they're kind of dark and pessimistic. Well, you fit right in there. Right. She also says they like to complain. You fit right in there. Right. Pickled herring, I fit right in there. But also, and don't take this personally, Nick, but I've always kind of resented salary jobs. Yeah. I mean, you know, as far as dictators go, you're a pretty benevolent dictator, but you're a dictator nonetheless. And partially it's got to do, and she talks about this in the book, the American system in which her lives are so precarious that if we lose our jobs, we lose our housing, we lose our healthcare, how our healthcare is provided by our employers, and that if you decide to change our insurance, then I may have to switch doctors or I may have to pay more out of pocket. And I'm totally dependent on you for so many things. There's something uncomfortable and wrong about it. I want, and what I've tried to do throughout my life, and it's why most of the first 25 years of my adult life, I was self-employed, is I want to be independent. That's the American dream, to be independent. Well, I don't think it's just an American dream. I think it's a dream of all people. Right. Used to be unexploited. And you have that independence, say in a country like Finland, where you don't have to worry about getting sick and going bankrupt because everybody's covered and it's affordable. If you have kids, you don't have to worry about paying $1,500 a month for daycare because daycare is free or affordable, no more than the equivalent of $300 a month. You don't have to worry about buying a house in a nice neighborhood so that your kids will have the opportunity to go to a good school because all of the schools are good. You don't have to worry about saving for college so that your kids don't have to go into tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt if they want to get an education so they can succeed in life because college is free to everybody. That creates a type of freedom that I feel that most people are missing in this country. And I think that people like you and me, though we have very, very different outcomes, we both came out of a very privileged environment where we did not have to worry how to pay for those things. We did not have to worry about how we were going to go to college because we had family to provide that, but we were lucky and we were the few. Yeah, for sure. And in a country like Finland, you can have all the advantages of a market economy, of what people call capitalism. Yeah, but very few of the downsides. And I think it allows you to be more free, more risk taking, more entrepreneurial because... And much less stressed. Much less stressed. And I think about it from an entrepreneurial sense. A lot of people, I mean, there's statistics, homeowners start fewer businesses than non-homeloaders because they're afraid to lose their house in the US. So to understand market capitalism as an evolutionary system is to understand that most businesses necessarily fail. They have to fail. That's how selection works. Most innovations don't succeed. But if failing in a business leaves you on the streets, well, then you're going to stick with that job that pays and allows you to feed your children and put a roof over their heads. So I look at the Finnish model and I say, okay, it's a little dark for me in the winters, but pessimism, complaining a lot, pickled herring, and oh, by the way, free healthcare, free daycare, good public schools, free college, and long-term care when you get old. That's the type of market capitalism for me. That's right. That's right. And none of these things are out of reach for Americans. Right. Are we less competent than the Finns? No. We could have all of these things. We could have all the extra vitamin D we have throughout most of the country. All of these things are within reach if we wanted them and if we could push past the entrenched interests that don't want us to have them, the healthcare system that we have that not only don't want us to have them, Nick, but don't want us to know that we have a choice about whether or not to have them. That's right. And those things have been, frankly, lying to us for decades about how these alternatives are hellscapes. In fact, they're not. These places are now more prosperous, more free, certainly easier and better to live in than what we call home. And all of this has happened in one lifetime and all of it happened because a certain small group of people wanted it to happen. And that means that we could make it un-happen if we wanted to, if we got together and did the right things and promoted the right policies and ideas. And opened up our imagination to a different kind of capitalism. Exactly. On the next episode, Nick, we're going to make a lot of our listeners really, really happy. I know. And so embarrassing that it's taken us so long to get around to this, right? Right. Because we're going to continue this conversation with the economist Steve Keene, who has been reimagining capitalism and tearing down the old economics. For a lot longer than we have. That's right. That's right. And is beloved by many of our listeners and around the world. And he's an incredibly smart guy. It'll be fun to talk to him. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.