 Hi there, Annie Fadley here. We've got more bonus content for you. A couple weeks ago, we spoke to Senator Cory Booker about stock buybacks. It was an awesome conversation, and we figured presidential candidates should probably be published in full. So here's the Senator's unedited conversation with Nick and Goldie. And in case you didn't know, Senator Booker has a podcast too. It's called Lift Every Voice, and it's available wherever you get your podcasts. Hope you enjoy. Hey Cory, it's Nick. How are you, buddy? Hey, man. I'm really psyched that you're doing a podcast. More than you know, that's just great news. Thank you. Thank you. And I know you do too. We're one of my initial professors when it came to economic justice issue from a perspective of somebody who actually has been a captain of industry. So I continue to savor you, but still your greatest contribution to my development as a leader was True Patriot. Oh, thank you so much. That's so kind of you to say. So you've been well. Things are busy in Washington, DC, USA. I literally just ran from the floor. I was making a speech on this criminal justice bill. We're about to get done. I love it. Congratulations. Yeah, really good. That is God's work, man. Thank you. Thank you. Good for you. Good for you. So can we let's just I know your time is short. So I want to jump right in. Would you please identify yourself? A great one to our listeners. My name is Cory Booker. I'm a United States Senator from the state of New Jersey. Yeah. And one of our favorite senators here at Civic Ventures and on the podcast Pitchfork Economics. So Cory, let me just start and interject. So you know, the other voice I'm David Goldstein. I may interject with a question. We'll see how this goes. Yeah. How is it having to work with Nick there? Well, we'll have a private conversation about that. Okay. I offer counseling sessions. I used to be a crisis counselor. That's right. Go tell the tell the senator how you refer to me as my plutocratic overlord. Yes. Benevolent, benevolent, plutocratic, overlord. If you're going to be stuck with a plutocratic overlord, thank God they're benevolent. Yeah. So we're super excited today to talk to you about one of our favorite subjects covering one of the worst excesses of modern capitalism, which is stock buybacks. And you have been at the center of that fight. And we wanted to talk to you about your bill, the Workers Dividend Act. So can you tell us about it and why you did it? Well, can I just take a step back? And this is what I've talked about for over 10 years. The economy of my dad's generation that built out the largest expansion in the middle class on the planet Earth. We have seen a massive warping of what my father, the economy my father grew up in that has resulted in the largest stratification of income we have ever seen historically in this country. And a shift towards what I call sort of a pernicious short termism, as opposed to a long term view of creating real growth and opportunity expanded to expanding pathways of prosperity for most Americans. And so this is a massive shift. And it's shifted because we've changed the rules. And it created what I think are incentives that work against a fair, just economy. And buybacks is just one way. Stock buybacks were illegal. It was considered market manipulation before 1982. And what a stock buyback is, is a corporation using its profits to buy back their stock, thus making the cost of the price of the stocks to jump up because you're creating more scarcity, more demand causes the cost to go up as a basic economic principle. And so that raises the stock price and benefits the corporation's short term benefits. And remember, again, these are things that were illegal before 1982, but also we've changed how CEOs are measured for their success. One of the things we now look at, CEOs are often benefited from is the price of their stock, what their quarterly earnings are. And so now that by doing that what was once market manipulation is now also benefiting that CEO who's, like most of us, we are incentivized by what our incentives are and their pay is often pegged towards their stock price. And that's created a very dramatic shift in the American economy. So for example, between 2003 and 2012, companies on the S&P 500 dedicated 91% of their total earnings to stock buybacks and corporate dividends, which left us 9% for investing in things like, hey, raises for their workers. But before the 1970s, remember when these things were illegal, this kind of market manipulation, the split was like 50-50 between dividends for stockholders and earnings and things like increasing worker pay. And remember, stock buybacks driving up the cost of stocks, it's a part of that shifting wealth in our society because 84% of all stocks are owned by the top 10% of households and the top 1% of households own about roughly 40% of stocks. And so if I can give you just one real life example of this, which just puts things into perspective. And that's what happened with American Airlines, which was, this was all done without apology with sort of shamelessness. But so you basically saw last year, American Airlines had a great quarter, they pulled in about $234 million in earnings, great bravo for American Airlines for doing that. And they announced to do the right thing that they were going to give long overdue pay raises to its pilots and its flight attendants. But America's decision, which was basically an acknowledgment that, hey, we want to fairly pay our workers, and that's important to our long-term success, we made a prudent decision. Unfortunately, it was immediately derided by Wall Street and by financial analysts. One analyst for Citigroup literally complained, and I'm going to quote the analysts, it said, quote, labor is being paid first again, shareholders get leftovers. Yeah. And Morgan Stanley literally downgraded American Airlines shares. And they went as far as to argue that it, quote, establishes a worrying precedent in our view, both for American and the industry. So again, we know and we remember, you know, corporations were formed. And by American law, they were seen to happen. And they were seen to have to be loyal to their constituencies, such as the towns and the cities, which they were, their workers. But we've seen a perversion of corporate ideals and corporate ethics to now their sole loyalty, according to Wall Street, which is actually providing the incentives of those CEOs. Those CEOs are now looking to their quarterly earnings and to their stock prices. It's perverted the system now away from those ethics of old where corporations were formed. And by the way, they're given that status, certain tax status by Americans, by American government. It's now perverted their focus from communities, from the common good, from their employees now to just those short term stock reports and quarterly earnings. And that's why we've tried to find a fix for that to balance out the incentives to get the focus back to those people that are increasingly we've seen 60 years of stagnant wages, while corporate profits now are have been driven up to an over 80 year high. Yeah, that was just a terrific explanation of where the country has gone wrong. Just a reminder to the audience, you're listening to Pitchfork Economics with Cory Booker. Yeah, it's so good. And so, you know, there was not one thing that you just said that I thought I disagreed with. I think you're dead on it. And I also observed the Wall Street reaction to American Airlines and was just I was just appalled by the naked, by the naked greed of it all. And in particular, the lack of self-awareness, right, just the astonishing assumption that the only thing that mattered was making rich people richer and that the employees actually didn't count at all in the equation that there was no social or political or economic utility created by fairly compensating them. And that literally, from the point of view of Wall Street, like, we could literally enslave those people. And if the profits went up, that would be righteous for everyone. It was just a just a remarkable expression of this sort of super concentrated form of neoliberalism that permeates our culture and our politics. I don't know how you get through life, Nick, when labor is always being paid first. I don't know. I don't know. But it's also misguided. It actually doesn't better companies. No, it hurts the well-being of that corporation. That's right. And we know countless examples of if you focus on people, if you invest in folks, if you pay them fair wages, not only does your corporation do better, but the society in which that corporation operates thrives. And right now, we are choking our democracy by shifting away the balance of power in this country that focuses on people, broad middle classes. And we're actually creating a dangerous system where the system itself is being delegitimized. And I see that by the rise of corporate power in America, by things like Citizens United, you see a concentration of power, a rise of economic power, a rise of political power, that then they come down and double down on that momentum that is turning and turning our society more and more away from workers and working people, literally stripping the dignity away from work, which ultimately undermines the security of our society as a whole. Yeah. So let's turn to solutions, Senator. How would the Workers Dividend Act address this? Well, the Workers Dividend Act basically says, look, if you are going to buy back stocks, what was just a matter of decades ago, something that was market manipulation, if you're going to engage in those practices, then you have to when you when you make those stock buybacks, you have to give a commensurate share of that dividend, of that profit to your employees themselves. So if you don't buy back stock, you can continue to pay your employees what they are. But if you do go for stock buybacks, then your workers have to see a benefit from it, have to benefit the whole community constellation of interests that are part of the corporation. The best thing I can do, again, is give you a real life example with the company that we often talk about for what it pays its workers, which is our nation's biggest corporate employer, which is Walmart. They have over 1.5 million employees. And so this is the example of what our bill would do. Walmart's starting wage is just $11 an hour, which is $19,448 a year for a full-time worker. By the way, I'm New Jersey Senator. You can't live in, like, let's say, the New York Metro College area and raise a family of four, like my grandfather did, who raised his family, my mom, on a factory worker's salary. You can't even afford an apartment for $19,000 a year. No. I mean, this is how much America has changed, again, in one generation, where jobs had dignity, jobs had security, and we've now taken that away. That's why I live in an airport town in New York, and I see people who work full-time jobs, catch extra shifts, and still need to live on food stamps and subsidized housing, because a lot of these corporations outsource their labor costs onto society being worse than that, onto the children of those families who now have more economic insecurity, which often translates to them doing worse in school, them doing worse in terms of their economic life outcomes. But let's get back to the bill. So it's less than $20,000 for a full-time worker. Now, Walmart saw in 2017 $9.8 billion in profits, which again is revenue minus expenses. Walmart's board decided that they were going to use, out of that $9.8 billion in profits, they were going to use $8.2 billion of it in stock buybacks in 2017, again, driving up their stock prices. But if my bill was there, if the worker dividend act, if it was law, every worker would have seen a dividend of $3,266 added to their annual pay. So they too would have had to benefit from that use of that stock, of that money for a stock like that. And Corey, if I could just interject, the way in which you just framed this is both accurate but very conservative, because that $9.8 billion in profit was after-tax profit. Yeah. That was the profit after-tax. So to be clear, if they had used some of this money to pay their workers, they would have increased their expenses, lowered their after-tax, lowered their pre-tax profits, and therefore lowered their tax bills so the net impact would really be lower. So it's cheaper for them in a way to pay people. Exactly. Absolutely. And that's what I talk to folks all the time who won't want to call themselves sort of free market people. And I give countless examples in my, and we've all had these arguments with folks about how our tax system, as we know it right now, has changed dramatically and is constantly shifting the collective resources of this country. We call them here in Washington tax expenditures, is shifting those tax expenditures to the wealthiest of people and creates decisions. Like, why is it that we as a society, a 55-year-old public school teacher, and we know these teachers who reach in their own pockets and spend on kids' school supplies, I know teachers in Newark that spend for food and for sanitary products for their teenage kids, and they have a very poultry tax break to be able to write off those expenses that they're doing, but they do it anyway. But yet, for a 25-year-old kid that works in a hedge fund, we give them better tax treatment, and in fact, they're paying less in taxes than their, because of carried interest, than their secretaries are. And so we make moral and value decisions with how we structure our tax code. And this is yet another example where we're shortchanging workers, where we're adding to the wealth disparities in our country, and ultimately weakening the strength of our democracy as a whole. So let me just play devil's advocate for a moment. And of course, by devil, I mean Republican. Okay. That's unfair. Wouldn't your bill just take money out of the pockets of shareholders and thus reduce investment in the economy and slow economic growth? You know, it's going to hurt the people it's intended to help, right? Well, I love this because I know Nick and I have had these conversations for over a decade. I remember that same argument was against raising the minimum wage. Because somehow you're going to weaken these companies if you pay people more. And I know that Nick is out there in Seattle. And as a result of raising people's minimum wage, putting more money in the pockets of working people, it has actually a multiplier effect in the economy, where you have folks who are getting those resources and actually spending more, working people who are often living paycheck to paycheck, will be spending that money more and will create a multiplier effect that ultimately helps businesses as a whole. As you said, Nick, to me, a decade or when you started fighting them in a waste battle, you predicted that that's what was going to happen is actually going to help restaurants in the community. And that's what had happened. Sure. And again, I'm sorry, I know. Go ahead. Go ahead. Go ahead. I just get very frustrated when people seem to have this misguided view, which I saw with the last Republican tax bill, which is if you just create more and more wealth at the top reaches of our society, that somehow that's going to trickle down and benefit us all. It's just a failed economic theory that doesn't hold water. Yeah. And Goldia, you were being slightly ironic, but I do think it's worth addressing the substance of this claim, which is that stock buybacks are just an efficient way of moving money through the economy. I mean, there are a couple of things that are bogus about it. The first is that, as you know, this money that's washing back to shareholders is not actually capital that's being deployed to build factories or anything like that. It's just this sort of artificial wealth. It's not artificial wealth, but it's paper wealth that is bouncing back and forth between rich people in the economy. That's first thing. And the second thing is, is it is a plausible claim that capital will be used for productive use. But as a practical matter, our society is awash in capital. The people who are being rewarded in this way already have essentially infinite amounts of capital. Our economy is not capital constrained. Our economy today is demand constrained. And the question isn't, you know, at some theoretical level, is capital a good thing? Of course it is. The question is, as a society, how should we best organize our economic policies to generate the most broad based growth? And stock buybacks are literally the least effective, least efficient thing we could do with 5% of our GDP in order to grow the economy and to find ways to share those benefits broadly. And so just, you know, I want to add one thing, sort of insult to injury. When you buy back stocks, please understand that foreign investors, people outside of our country, one third of all of our corporate stock is owned by foreign investors. So as opposed to paying American workers more, if you're shifting your investments to stock buybacks, you're benefiting significantly people outside of our country, making them more wealthy as well. You know, I never considered that. That's a fascinating point. That's just a fascinating point. So Senator, I have maybe a difficult question to ask. Why haven't Democrats done more? I mean, your proposal sounds great, but are Democrats stuck in this neoliberal mindset as well? Why haven't your colleagues done more to address this issue? Well, one is I want to give Tammy Baldwin some credit who has a bill that she's trying to ban them all outright, go back to pre-1982 and just get rid of stock buybacks. I've been sort of frustrated. So I'm the only United States Senator that lives in a low income, I think the median income, according to the last census of where I live is about $14,000 per household. And these are conversations I have in my community all the time about sort of the, I consider the boiling of the frog where we have not been paying attention to all the things as the temperature is being turned up on working Americans and creating a lot of understandable resentment and anger. Remember, 90% of baby boomers did better than their parents. We're now down to about 50%. And there's a lot of demagogues coming along trying to say that this is Muslims, Mexicans, Chinese, and so on and so forth, as opposed to things that are fundamentally changing in our economy, shifting it towards what I call a short term economy where, as I said before, I was an airport town. Let me go one step further than that. New York Times has a great article about a janitor that worked for Kodak versus a janitor that worked for Apple. And they follow that janitor that worked for those companies in the 60s and 70s like Kodak and IBM where my parents got their first jobs, where a janitor still could participate in the tuition assistance program and had benefits and retirement security. And they follow this one janitor, she started as a janitor, but she worked up into middle management. It was a great story of somebody who was willing to work during the day, go to school at night, so on and so forth. Well, the janitor that works for Apple doesn't work for Apple. They work for an outsourcing company that competes for that contract by bidding down wages, giving no security whatsoever, no retirement benefits, no health benefits. In an airport town, when I board a plane, sometimes if I get on first and I see somebody delivering that food, they don't work for the airline that they're delivering that food. They work for, again, one of these outsourcing companies where they don't get the benefits that that corporation do. It's very different than the society that we had of our parents and our grandparents. And so I just want my party to be the party that starts standing up for and calling out these new practices in our economy and offering up substantive solutions to empower, bring dignity back to work and to bring pathways back to work. I always say that my father, if you were in heaven around the time my father was born, even if you were a black guy like my dad and you were going to pick a country to be born in, the United States would be at the top of your list because we were expanding middle class at a rate that there was creating opportunity. But now, if you're going to be born born on the planet earth, the United States of America is not going to be necessarily, if you're just looking to get out of poverty, if that's your only metric, this is not necessarily the top country if you're going to be born poor to get out. And that's actually an assault on the very idea of the American dream. So I think that we need to be the party of reclaiming the dream. We need to be party of reimagining this nation to create great pathways of prosperity. And this is just one of those bills that my team and I are sitting down and saying, okay, how is this being rigged? How are the rules changed? How can we address those changes? Yeah. So, you know, just in the spirit of Goldie's question, we are living through very, very difficult times. But one of the hopeful signs to me is the way in which the egregiousness of the problems has energized people from across the political spectrum around bigger, bolder solutions. Right. And, you know, I think that that the circumstances are giving, honestly, you know, folks like you, folks like me, permission to push way farther around policy ideas than we did or maybe could have 20, 30 years ago. And I think that the best thing the Democratic Party could do for itself, could do for the nation, is to redefine for people what's possible, to assert with confidence and clarity, you know, a bunch of policies that will make a giant difference in the lives of ordinary Americans. And by so doing, you know, like stand for something that's meaningful and useful. And I think the word you said is working Americans. Look, I went out to visit red state farmers in the Midwest. And these are Republican, I sat in Republican homes and Republican backyards. And their issues are no different than the issues that all of us on this call agree on. In fact, I left those farmers and put in a bill right away saying, let's put a moratorium on ag mergers. Right. Because they, these are folks who are telling me that the corporate consolidation going on is giving them only one buyer often to sell their goods to. And their share of the consumer dollar has shrunk dramatically, about 40% or more over the past decades. And so I now see a country where working Americans, whether they're working on farms, working in airports, like in my community, we have all of this common pain, but we've lost our sense of common purpose. Right. Where, as you said, eloquently with the clarity and understanding that, that we need to have a purpose to get this country back to the dignity of work and pathways of prosperity, where everybody has a fair shot of, if you labor and work hard, America will work for you. And that's where I think that we as a party have to go to, because there's a lot of folks in America that don't think our party speaks to them anymore. And they're either checking out of the system or, or, or, or being pulled in by a lot of the, I think lies that president Trump tried to feed factory workers or coal miners, a lot of lies that they, that he told them, because they look like no other party's working for me, but at least this guy is telling me that he, that he feels my pain and it's going to try to address the hurt of my family. Yeah. Well, people often bemoan the fact that voting participation rates are so low, but you know, what I always say is, well, we haven't given him a reason to vote in a very long time, you know, like, you start to talk about raising people's incomes by 10, 20, 30%, you will have their attention. You know, but if we're, if we're, you know, pretending to make a difference at the margin, then nobody, nobody will care. So, so it's, I'm sorry, I wrote you, but it's not only raising their incomes, but, but lowering their costs. Yes. Right. We have this bill right now, addressing the pharma industry and all the games that they play. Oh my God. What a corrupt, what a corrupt industry that is. And the more you expose it, there's no, they play, they, they are, they're so smart, even on the state level by messing with Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements. I mean, the more I dig dug into this, the more this stuff is so, it is, it is against the ideas of a free free free market. Yeah. You can't have it both ways. Right. And, and, and so I think we should be a party and I, and there's a lot of other issues I care about, but first and foremost, we should be about returning dignity, lowering the cost of living because, you know, for those of us who live in the New York area, there's a guy who ran his whole camp, which is too damn high. Don't, don't get me a starter on housing policy in this country. Right. No, it's perverses, but we need to lower expenses, create dignity and work again, which is raising incomes. And by the way, I know this is not, you guys talk about pitchforks, but this is actually not about vilifying wealth. This is about creating a country where you can actually have fairness and everybody's going to benefit more by having a country that treats its workers with dignity and give them opportunities for prosperity. That's right. That's right. So Senator Booker, what's next? What else? What, what, what else? We have a bold legislative agenda. We're coming out to this new Congress just swinging. And, and, and by the way, I, I, it's not for me, it's not just, this is not just thought pieces that are just being thrown out for messaging. We, we have a lot of policies that we think are about create balancing the scales in this country, derigging the system. And so that we're, we're doing everything from, from baby bonds, to attacking, as we already talked about the cost of healthcare in this country with, with, with pharmaceutical, array of things focusing on pharmaceutical prices. I'm really, really focused on, you know, we'd have 20% less poverty in America, 20% less poverty in America. If our incarceration rates were the same as our industrial peers and this hyper incarceration is in my community, you know, there's no stopping and frisking of people on college campuses in, at Stanford. When I was growing up in a, in a, in a relatively affluent community compared to where I live now, you know, kids did things wrong, but they weren't arrested for them. And so, so people don't often link economic empowerment to the criminal justice system. So we're going after hard after the things that have rigged the system that have made low income people have a harder time being successful, working people having a hard time making a living. And that includes everything from housing to other economic justice bills like, like this, the workers dividend act. And it includes definitely things that are often not talked about enough, which really hurt low income communities. And one I'll give you that people often don't equate with economic opportunity, but we live in a nation where there's over a thousand jurisdictions where it's easier to find unleaded gasoline than unleaded water. And why is that an economic issue? Why is that an economic issue is because children who go to school with elevated blood lead levels, they don't even need lead poisoning, have significantly higher rates of failures at school, incarceration and the like. And so when you're in a community, and again, I use mine as an example, because this is what motivated me into politics in the first place, where your soil is toxic, your air is toxic, we have a criminal justice system that is savagely unfair, where you have a school system that could be failing your genius. And where the jobs that are available to you don't even pay a living wage. Where people like, there's a young woman I wrote about in my book, who's a friend of mine named Natasha Laurel, who worked at IHOP and couldn't leave her job, had to struggle to leave her job when her son had asthma. Remember, urban areas often have three or four times the asthma rates. Her son was in the hospital across the street from the IHOP, where the only country, I mean, the only industrialized country that doesn't have paid family leave, Afghanistan and the Congo have paid family leave. She couldn't, she had to make that terrible decision that workers all across America have to make about going to be there for a sick child or staying and getting a paycheck so I can keep a roof over their head. We need to start having policies in this country that speak to the economic pain of people, restore dignity to work, and make sure that no matter where you're born in America, that we're still a country that no matter what your zip code, no matter what your race, no matter what your background, this is the nation that the American dream is real where you can, if you work hard, America will work for you and you can find prosperity. And so we're going to continue to push legislation addressing these things, even the things that aren't popular, the things that folks aren't talking about, because I still believe that in one generation we can correct for how off course we've gotten from where our my grandparents generation was. I love it, I love it. Well, Corey, you have been with us for longer than you promised you would be and we are so grateful that you took the time to do it and I must say I was very impressed with the the force of logic and the command of detail that you have around these subjects. Very, very impressive. I must say, well, can I just say to you guys? Yeah, I and Nick knows this because Nick is just a guy I he's been like a guru of sorts, like somebody who's like really challenged me taught me a lot over these years, even before I got into the Senate, gave me one of my favorite books. Still to this day, a book to patient patriot, Gardens of our democracy is good as well. But you guys cast cast yourselves as radicals in the language of pitchforks. I just want to challenge you all. Don't let the political spectrum move so much that you guys are painting yourself as a rat. The reality is what the kind of things you're talking about FDR talked about, the kind of things right talked about Martin Luther King talked about. Yes, it's not radical to say somebody who works a full time job in America should be able to have a decent wage, be able to raise a family, should be able to retire with dignity. Please don't let yourself be cast yourselves as radicalism. You were where you stand is that the bedrock of what people's idea is of it is America. And by the way, that's what conservatives want to say. I can't tell you how many times I read about myself, or hear myself on Fox News trying to be painted as an angry radical when the reality is no, we are we represent right or left people call themselves Republican or Democrat. The kind of things you guys are talking about are common sense, they are that rock American value. And, you know, and Corey, that we've been saying is, you know, these these ideas aren't fringe lefty, they are centrist. When you're talking about raising the wages of the people in the middle of the economic spectrum spectrum, that's not radical lefty socialism, that's centrist capitalism, right, that that raising the minimum wage to 15 to $20 an hour benefits most people in the economy, raising the overtime threshold to the 80th percentile benefits most people in the economy, affordable health care for all benefits most people in the economy, affordable college benefits, most people in the economy, these are centrist ideas, not fringy ideas or radical ideas. I know this is a secular show, but Amen. Hallelujah. Seriously, that you're 100% right. We should keep saying that to broaden our coalition. I don't want us to be, you know, we're in a danger. We have a crossroads as a Democratic Party. We can take on the darkness and the hate, the kind of rhetoric and vilifying individuals, or we can try to have a message that is really inclusive. It speaks to those farmers in the Midwest. I talked to about those factory workers, those coal miners. We have message for those folks. The Democratic Party was that party. It's why my grandfather, most Americans of today's age don't remember that most Blacks in America were Republicans. It wasn't until the 1930s and FDR, now my grandfather dragged to the day he died, that he switched 14 districts in Michigan over to being Democrats, because this was the party of working people, factory workers, coal miners, farmers. We are the party of security, social security, Medicare. We are the party of equality and inclusion, women's rights, civil rights. We've got to get back to those basic things that show that this is a country where we're all in this together and we need to create a fair system that empowers human potential. That's what we stood for. We spoke to all working people across the spectrum. Now, I'm tired of hearing people try to slice and dice us and talk about white Midwestern men versus a Latina inner city. We all have the same ambitions and same desires. What you all are talking about in this podcast, cuts down those illusions of separateness and shows that we are in this together. We have common pain. Let's come back in America to that sense of common purpose again. Love it. Love it. All right, sir. Will, thank you so much and more to follow. We've got to get some stuff done, dude. Amen. Rock and roll. I love it. Okay, Corey, thank you so much. Thank you for your time. Talk to you. Thank you. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L-A-R-J media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and follow our writing on Medium at Civic Sconcorks. And you should also follow Nick Hanauer on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. Thanks for listening.