 Hi, I'm Stephanie Ervin. Since we recorded our original conversation with Jay Inslee, Governor of Washington, and a presidential candidate, all the Democratic hopefuls have taken the first debate stage. So we thought it actually might be a good time for you all to hear our full conversation with presidential candidate Inslee. Who knows? Maybe it'll help you make up your mind. Okay, here's the conversation. Okay, I got to get your logos facing out. I'm going to just ask you guys to keep talking for a second so I can get your levels okay. Yeah, okay. And thus you want to be kind of close to. You think? Yep. Okay, thank you. Just because the room's a little bit oomy. And I just need about 30 seconds to get set up. And I'll just listen and I may do some adjusting and I'll just let you know. Okay, so how should we begin the conversation? Well I obviously you should welcome him. And we're going to we want to talk a lot about climate and why it's an economic issue. It's an issue that touches everything starting with the economic issue. Well I think that's part of his answer is that it's an issue that touches all these other issues and that there really isn't every single other issue. It's kind of meaningless if you've got a planet that you can't live on. So even the ones that seem tenuously related. I'm ready when you get there. Okay. Okay. All right, here we are. And here we are in particular with our old friend, Governor of Washington Jay Inslee. So welcome to Pitchfork Economics, Governor Inslee. Thank you. I'm glad we have the best times in the business at the Pitchfork. Yes, exactly. They ring so beautifully. And I'm joined also by my colleague David Goldstein. Welcome. Thanks, Goldy. And so today we wanted to talk to the governor who hopes not to be governor in the future and to be president of the United States about, mostly about the issue that sort of frames his campaign, which is climate change. And in particular wanted to expand on how climate change really isn't the narrow issue that some people think of it as, but rather is the broad, a broad issue, first of all an existential issue, but an issue that is broad and touches a lot of the issues that other people care about. Yeah. Explain why you are not a single issue candidate when you run on climate. Well, listen, we know a scientific fact that we are the first generation to feel the sting of climate change and we are the last generation that can do something about it. And this is an urgent matter. We have exactly one shot to get this done. You know, a lot of things in life, you could put off 10 years or 20 years, you cannot put this off because the next administration is the last chance to really fundamentally save us from the cataclysmic results of climate change. And so when you have only one chance, you need to take it. And the reason this is such a universal issue is that it touches everything in our lives, every place in the United States, and we cannot solve our multiple desires and challenges unless this one is resolved because without a healthy system to support you, you can't solve your other problems. So it is the one time that we have, it is the all-encompassing issue, and it is something we've got to work together on to get done. So we need a spark of inspiration from the president. And here's the reason. This touches everything, not just one thing. It is an economic issue, an economic issue of destruction. Right now we've had $1.6 billion of damage in the Midwest from these floods. I walked through Paradise, California, which is this town of 25,000. It was spooky walking through at night. That was the one that burned recently. 25,000 people. That town was totally destroyed, burnt right to the foundations. So this is in the billions of dollars of damage today. That's on the downside. On the upside, I know we're going to talk about the clean energy job economy that we can grow, enormous job creation inherent in this. So it's a huge economic issue. It is a huge health issue. It's an issue of asthma, an epidemic of asthma of our kids, of COPD, of infectious diseases, because we have these insects moving north now because the climate is changing so rapidly. It's a national security issue. We had General Fallon, or Admiral Fallon, former commander of the Pacific Fleet here last week. And the Pentagon is tearing their hair out right now, looking at the fact that we're going to have a lot more political instability because of mass migrations from millions of climate refugees because of desertification. We're experiencing that on our right here in Central America. It gets you both ways. It gets you both ways. Or famine, or anything. It's a biblical experience that we're having right now, unfortunately. So it is not one issue. It is all issues. Even if it was one issue and one regard, if you wanted to look at that way, look, on December 8, 1941, the morning after Pearl Harbor, would people have accused Franklin Roosevelt of being a single-issue president? This is an existential threat. It is a threat to the basic stability of our nation. We have to have a president who will call the better capabilities of this country forth to defeat this beast. I want to know, let's talk about my question here. We'll do this over. Let's be practical here. I mean, sure, it's an existential crisis, but how can we afford to save the planet and still give giant tax cuts to Nick? What's the priority here? Well, first off, let's be practical. Let's not allow the destruction of the nation. That is a practical thing. Look, when your house is on fire, you got to grab some buckets and put the fire out. And our planet literally is on fire right now, figuratively and literally. And so it is a practical response not to allow your house to burn down. People say this is sort of a unicorns and rainbows. No, it's whether you're going to have a place to live. So this is a very practical thing to do. And even if you have questions about how bad this is going to be, you buy insurance for your house. This is an insurance policy as well. And as far as Nick's tax returns, look, this is also a way to bring more justice to our society. And this is really important. We know that income inequality is a huge justice issue in our society. And this is a way to embed what I think of is we have to make a transition to a decarbonized economy. And in doing that, we need a just transition, not just a transition. We have to build a clean energy economy that focuses on helping frontline communities, marginalized communities. We know that the first victims of climate change are usually people in poverty, communities of color. And we have to build a just transition to focus on that, to use this as a tool to bring more income equality rather than income inequality. And there's many ways you can do that. We're doing that in some of the bills that we're doing here in Washington state right now. So this is not just an environmental issue. It is an economic issue. It is a social justice issue. And I'm really pleased that people are starting to think of it in these terms. It's going to help us get this done. Yeah. And if I might suggest, I actually don't think of your campaign or climate change as an issue so much as an organizing principle. It's simply a way of organizing or thinking around addressing the biggest problems facing the nation. And you can come at it. You can come at political economy in one way or you can come at it another way. And using climate as the organizing principle probably certainly may be the best way to come at all these issues given the intersection of the climate crisis and the need to transform our economy in all sorts of important ways and to bring more justice to it and more fairness. So – Well, that is the term I use. You used it as an organizing principle for the campaign. That's exactly the language I use. We have to have this as an organizing principle for the whole federal government, meaning you can't just have one little agency checking the box to deal with this issue. You have to embed this as an organizing tenet of your governing philosophy. I'll give you an example. So tax policy. This isn't just an environmental issue. It's a tax policy. And one of the first things we need to do is to stop raiding Americans' pockets to shell out $27 billion in tax subsidies to the fossil fuel industry. We need to end that gravy train right now and redirect some of those funds into research and deployment of clean energy and helping consumers get access to clean energy. So it's tax policy. It's health policy. It's national security policy. You have to embed this throughout your administration to get this done. And the central thing I'm saying in my campaign is this has to be job one. This has to be the first, foremost, and top priority of the United States. If it is not job one, it won't get done because you have to be able to – willing to spend the political capital, build the mandate during your campaign to carry it in to make it a real governing philosophy. And this is one thing that separates me from the other aspirants to this. I'm the only person who's saying this who recognizes what you have to do to actually get this job done. Yeah. So as we're talking about this, what really jumps into my head is the conversation we had – you know, just sort of bringing this whole conversation from the very abstract to the concrete, I'm reminded of the conversations we had with Hilary Franz, who is the leader of the Department of Natural Resources here in Washington State, and our joint efforts between Civic Ventures and her team to sort of address the wildfire crisis that we're having in Washington State, which is a product of climate change. And what strikes me is that – so, you know, a long time ago, if we had one forest fire a season, that was a big deal, and we scrambled to deal with it. Last year we had 1,800 forest fires. This year we've already had 50 a month before the teams were even stood up to begin to fight them. And here's the thing is that our society is already spending hundreds of millions or billions of dollars dealing with this crisis in a backwards ad hoc way in the same way that we're already spending money on climate change to deal with the flooding that's happening in the Midwest or the cyclones that are happening around the world. The question isn't whether you're going to spend the money to deal with it or not. The question is whether you're going to organize yourself to prevent the catastrophes and actually extract value from that process or just deal with the crap that comes as a consequence of it. Well, you hit the nail on the head, and, you know, we have a lot of criticism from mostly Republicans in this regard saying it's just too expensive. It's just not too expensive to stop your house from burning down. And that's the situation. Right. Exactly. Buy a bucket. Yeah. Yeah. You're buying the bucket is the cheapest thing you can do. Absolutely. And so I think that is exactly the situation. And by the forest fire threat is so dire and it's so disturbing because the science predicts we will have twice as many of these intense stand clearing forest fires. And when you go to these communities like I have, I was in both Paradise, California and Seminole Springs and talked to these families that have been burned out. I went to a home. The Seminole Springs have placed about 100 mobile homes burned down. These people don't have insurance, you know, for your mobile home. They're just destitute. Their whole lives are wiped out. So this is a very real thing to me that we've got to act on. And so in our state, you know, we're proposing just to use this tiny little example to analogize to the I think what you're saying about climate change generally is that for a little tiny bit of money, we can stand up a much more robust proactive response to forest fires, make sure that we have far fewer of them and that they'll and that and that when we have them, they'll be put out quicker. We'll use those resources in the off season to manage the forests better so that we have fewer forest fires and the output of that forest management, the small trees and brush will go into industry into these new cross laminate timber factories to create jobs and produce a product that we can use for affordable housing. So for a tiny middle little bit of money upfront, we can address a climate change issue, save property, clean the air, generate a new industry and everybody's better off. Right? So if you did that at the national scale, then we'd be in business. Well, Exxon's not better off. I mean, okay, that's true. That's true. Exxon is not better off. And that gets to I think one of the challenges facing us is there's a lot of money and power opposed to doing anything about climate because they profit from the system the way it is. How do we address that part of the political challenge? Well, first off, you say you're not taking money from the fossil fuel industries. And I made that pledge. So that's the first thing. And second, you say you're going to stop this gravy training with these giant billion dollar efforts. And third, you fight back about their against their misinformation campaign. Look, they have been running the same campaign that tobacco industry ran for decades. And it's been unfortunately partially effective. But now we are turning the tide in public opinion, both because people are seeing these disasters firsthand. And they're also seeing the job creation that's happening right now, because jobs in the clean energy sector are now growing twice as fast as the US economy, the number one fastest growing job today is a solar installer. Number two is an wind turbine technician. And I'm going to testify in Congress Tuesday to my whole my old committee. And my fundamental message is there are a hell of a lot more jobs in fighting climate change than there is in denying climate change. You're creating it. You're creating it. That's exactly true. And that's happening all across the country. Look, you can't turn over a rock where we don't have clean energy jobs being created in batteries and Nevada and wind turbines and Iowa and electric cars. I was on The View a couple weeks ago talking to Megan McCain. That was delightful. And she said, you know, you Democrats are trying to take away our planes and our railroads and our cars. And I said, well, that's interesting. At this moment, I've got a shiny blue General Motors Bolt all electric drive. It was made by the American workers in Oregon, Michigan. And the fact is that we have these products available made by American workers. In fact, they're putting on 400. The same day Donald Trump held one of his crazy rallies in Michigan saying that, you know, this is a disaster. General Motors said we're adding 400 new employees making electric cars. Every major auto manufacturer is now going to have a line of electric cars. So I think that this is a message that resonates with the optimistic version, too. We haven't talked about this from kind of an emotional standpoint yet. But I do believe that this resonates with the American character. We are fundamentally an optimistic can-do people. We are the most innovative people in the world, or can-do people. And Trump's pessimism is not part of who we are as a nation. Yeah, for sure. You've talked about this as a moonshot. When you're out there campaigning, do voters still believe in America that we can do big things like this, big challenges rise up to it? They do. I think that fundamental character is there. But you need a spark. It's like anything else. You need a spark. And you need presidential leadership to create this vision, to give people hope. When I was in Seminole Springs, one of the things they said, hey, you've brought a little hope to our community. Presidents need to do that. I saw this in my own life when Kennedy says we're going to the moon back in 10 years. And so I think that spark is what the nation needs right now. And I think the nation will respond. The public perception of this is changing dramatically. What used to be a graph on a chart is now a picture of a town that's burned down. So public perception is ready for this if we have that inspiration. And I think, frankly, America's had a belly full of the fear and insecurity of Donald Trump. He's fundamentally an insecure person. We need someone with a little confidence in the American character to build a new economy. So I think we are ready for this. And people have said, well, geez, we can't decarbonize the economy in 10 years. And they want to quibble about timelines. I mean, when Kennedy said we're going to the moon in 10 years, did anybody sit around and say, oh, no, I think it'll be 11 and a half. So let's not go. No, we want to push the go button on this revolution. We know it can happen. We know it's going to be a hugely productive thing economically in jobs. And we know it's going to be good for our kids. And it's a moral thing to do. Look, I marched with these kids who went on this climate strike. I was in New York. And they were marching right past Trump Tower holding up their sign saying, there is no planet B. Donald Trump let us breathe. This is a moral obligation. You cannot be a parent or a grandparent or an aunt or a neighbor of a kid and look them in the eye and say, I'm not going to do anything for you. So I'm happy about it. Nick has given me the high sign to quit pounding the table. I get energized about this message on occasion. Hey, you're learning how to do podcasts. I sit on my hands. Podcast 101. Sit on your hands. So let's get into a little bit of the specifics. We hear a lot, you know, Green New Deal, you're running on climate, you want to make it the top priority. You've talked about how we need to shift from a carbon economy to a carbon free economy. And whenever you have big disruptive changes like that in the economy, there are winners and losers. And that's what gives a lot of people fear that they'll be the losers. How do we go into this? What do we do to prevent there from being losers so that everybody comes out of this a winner, not just in a cleaner, safer planet, but also economically, the folks, the out of work coal miners, the folks in the fracking fields and so forth, to be able to reassure The senior executives at Exxon. Yeah, I'm not as worried about them. But sure, even the senior executives at Exxon, how do we make sure that there is economic justice and inclusion in such a disruptive program? Well, you think about it, number one, and we think about doing everything humanly possible to smooth any such transition and difficulties. So that means you focus on making investments in communities that might have that type of dislocation. You focus on your infrastructure investments in those communities that might have that dislocation. You focus your education and training opportunities to really embrace people and put your arms around them and give them every single scholarship under the sun. You create tax systems that help communities that might be able to have difficulty in that regard. So you do all those things that will, as I've talked about, to have a just transition, not just a transition. But if you really think about it, when you look backwards in time and you say, did the transition from the horse-drawn economy to the steam engine really destroy a lot of lives? It really did not. And one of the reasons it did not is it didn't happen over a 24-hour period. This is not going to happen over a 24-hour period. Transitions do take some years, and people accommodate their ambitions in this regard. And so this is not something where you're just going to turn the lights out overnight. And so people do have time if you help them through these transitions. And I don't think anyone now would say, no, we should not have gone from horses to steam engines because we will have some transition. We are all going to have better lives ultimately by going through this transition. I am convinced of it. Right. I mean, literally, the transition from horses to internal combustion was a 20-year period. It happened in two decades. We're talking about over a several-decade period decarbonizing the U.S. economy. Now it has to be several decades rather than several centuries, or our goose is cooked. And we've got to get started right now. If you look at the IPCC report, what they have made clear is we've got to start right now. We just do not have any more time. By the way, this is one of the reasons why I think we need to end the filibuster, because we are not going to be able to move this through the legislature if we don't end the ability of 40 Republicans to stop all progress. And I'm the only candidate, which is actually a little shocking to me, who's willing to say that. Look, you're not going to have health care. You're not going to have climate change. You're not going to have anything as long as we give this senatorial privilege. And so far, I'm the only candidate. Yeah, by the way, it's not 40. It's one. Right. Right. It's one angry old white guy. There you go. There you go. It can stop anything. It's weird that all those senators are opposed to ending the filibuster. So senators, I don't want to disparage senators, of course, but you know, you do. Some of our best friends are senators. You do get a custom. You do get a little happy about that senatorial privilege and that is that you cannot allow senatorial privilege to stand in the chance that we're going to save the planet. Yeah. And this is, you know, because again, we got one shot. So I've taken a firm position on this. By the way, before I forget, for those who might be listening to this, if you share some of my ideas, I hope you will help me get this message onto the stage during the first debate in June, which takes 65,000 people to send in somewhere between $1 and $5,600 to jensley.com. And I hope those who are interested, if there's anybody with a dollar in your pocket, jensley.com, if you can send in a dollar to that, that will hopefully get us on the stage in the next debate. Right. That's a shameless plug. I appreciate that. And I'm going to add to that, even if they're not ready to support you, even if you're not their first choice, because you're the only one who is running on climate. And I'm afraid if you don't get onto the stage in June, that's going to send a message to all those senators that maybe climate is something they don't need to talk about. Yeah. So that would be terrible. I agree with that assessment. I think having this flag on the debate and have it succeed is very important on the messaging part of this. And, you know, look, everybody says is checking the box on climate change running for this on the democratic side, but checking the box is not enough. You have to put your weight behind it. You have to put your priority behind it. And I know this because I've been a governor. Now that's also relatively rare in the field. So I've governed into govern is to choose. So this is a unique position and I agree with you. It is important that that message be on the stage. And I agree. Look, there might be multiple candidates you can send a dollar to to have these messages I guess what you say is we're we will accept polygamy, not just monogamy in this situation. They'll both be successful to make sure this is on the stage. Yeah. We just going to hold there. What what else should we talk about? What do we miss? I think that was pretty good. We have to say sometimes. Well, here's one thing I would hope we can talk about. Yeah. It's like, you know, why do I think I get anything done, which is the Washington story? I just talked briefly about why we get this why I think we get things done because I've done X, Y and Z. And so, Jay, what what gives you confidence that you can get this kind of stuff done? Well, a lot of folks have talked about the things we've talked about, but it's fairly rare of actually getting it done. And I've been able to get a lot done in our state to help create a really an economic miracle in Washington, where we're listed as the best place to do business by Business Insider magazine and the best place to be an employee by Oxfam. That's a really unique two for. And the reason part of the reason we've had this incredible GDP wage and job growth is because we've embraced policies that really help build a middle class rather than the trickle down economics of Brand X. And so the kind of things that we've done, I've just seen tremendous things that I've been able to get done in the last six years. Look, we've got the best paid family leave medical leave in the nation. The most robust. We've had one of the greatest increases in the minimum wage, thanks to Nick and Goldie's leadership that has demonstrated that we can raise wages and actually increase jobs. Look, the place with one of the biggest wage increases on minimum wage is the state with the greatest job creation rate, for goodness sakes. So these two things are connected. This is a template for success, as you've pointed out. They're not a reason for failure. They're a reason for success. We've embraced and I've signed the first net neutrality bill in the United States as governor because I recognize the threat to our freedoms on the Internet a long time ago. We've got the best voting rights bill to fight Republican voter suppression. Yeah, we probably have the best voting system in the country. We might be tied with, or arguably, California and Oregon. But since I'm running for president, I will say ours is the best. Tell us that. Hard to do voter suppression in a vote by mail system. Yeah, so we need to- Where the ballots are free to mail in and- We have to have remote voting for all Americans. This is a civil right issue because as long as you allow an elected official in a small, say Southern community, decide where the voting machines go, they're not going to go where Democrats are people of color left. So we have to give everybody the right to vote by mail like we have and the sure I paid for postage, as you know. We've got a big, huge success on transportation infrastructure. We can't build a birdhouse in DC. We've got $70 billion of work and 70% is in public transportation. We had a huge increase on our educational front with 8,000 more students in early childhood, 20,000 more students with great financial aid. We got the richest financial aid program. And one of the proudest things is I finally got a wage increase for educators to keep them in the classroom. So you ask why I'm confident we can do this. It's because we've actually done these things in Washington state where everybody's talking about in the Senate, we've done in my state. And so I believe that we can expand opportunity. And it's why we stood up for basic values. I'm proud I was the first governor to stand up against a Muslim ban. I'm proud to have spoken out against the horrific child separation policy. And I've already had one confrontation personally with Donald Trump in the White House where I told him he should quit tweeting and start listening to educators. And his idea to armed teachers was just nuts. So we've also passed some of the best gun safety legislation, again, thanks to Nick's efforts. And I lost my seat voting for the assault weapon bill in 1994. Now I'm a governor and a potential president to advance common sense gun legislation. So we've got this record of achievement that is unique. Governing is an executive function. And I've demonstrated that executive function that we need in the White House, particularly after the chaos of these folks right now. Look, Donald Trump and his crew, they couldn't run a two car funeral. It's just ridiculous. So we need executive experience with that job done. It is the keystone cops. I can't believe you want to impose this dystopian economy on the rest of the country. I mean, what is the country going to do with a $15 minimum wage and high job growth, high wage growth? I mean, that's terrible. This is communism. It's the nightmare that we all the Republicans all dread. Why is that? Can I ask you something? You've been in Congress, like particularly on climate. Do they really not believe in science? So this is an interesting psychological discussion. And I'll just tell you my theory on this. Not really, because it is self, it is self a deception. Republicans have been self deceived on climate. It is not for lack of scientific literacy. And that's the thing that's stunning. You have Republican members of Congress who have become dentists, have become physicians. They had to take physics. They had to take chemistry. And so how is it possible that they would deny climate science? And it is pure self deception. Because in their minds, they think I have to deceive myself, at least publicly. Because if I admit that this is a problem, we'll have to have some community response to it. And that will by necessity involve some governmental activity because we have to have some communal response to this. And they can't stand the thought of the community, instead of giving $27 billion to their oil company buddies, will actually help subsidize to some degree solar panel companies. They can't stand that thought. And so it's just a pure self deception. And it's very regrettable. Because in the rest of the world, this is not a partisan issue. The conservative parties around the rest of the world have embraced this as well because they understand it. So we're hoping this is going to change. I keep waiting for Teddy Roosevelt to emerge. And we open our hands to Republicans to come to the table on this. Hasn't happened yet. Until then, they simply need to be removed from public office and think good, we did that last fall. Whereas Democratic chair, I won seven new governorship. We flipped seven seats, five in the Midwest. By the way, Nick, you want to you ask why I think I can get this done. When I was chair of the Democratic Governors Association, we flipped five seats in the Heartland we won Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, Illinois, Kansas, I know how to win right down the Heartland by making sure we have messages that resonate with people. And so I feel very confident about winning this thing too. And let's be clear, $15 minimum wage raising the federal minimum wage that resonates, even in the Heartland. You betcha it does. This has a huge success and support by the American people. They understand that. There's other things that resonate. Decriminalizing marijuana resonates across the United States as well. Another issue where politicians, particularly Republicans, are behind where the people are. And I'm for catching up where the people are, which is higher wages, more freedom and protection against intolerance. And that's a fundamental message that I think everybody can embrace, certainly our party. So I'm looking forward to it. Great. Thanks, guys. Yeah, we get to vote. Great, great conversation. Thank you so much for being here. Thank you. Governor, President soon to be elected, maybe. Listen, you go to jayansley.com. We make this happen. Okay. At the very least, get you into that debate. There you go. That's the first step. All right. Thanks, guys. Okay. All right. Thank you. Thank you for coming into doing it. Thank you. What? Oh, this is great. Try to avoid the table. This is great. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L-A-R-J media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork economics. And one more, you should definitely follow Nick on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always, a big thank you to our guests and thanks to you for listening from our team at Civic Ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach Silk, Jessen Farrell, Jasmine Weaver, Stephanie Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul Constant, Steven Paulini, and Annie Fadley. See you next week.