 My name is Paul Constant. I work here at Civic Ventures and I host on this podcast sometimes. I also co-founded a website called the Seattle Review of Books where we run book news, reviews and interviews. From time to time, I like to recommend books that I think would make for good further reading to fans of this podcast, people who would like to learn more about how economics works in action. This time around, I wanted to recommend a relatively new book. It just came out earlier this fall. Christopher Leonard is a business reporter. He's written for some of the heaviest hitters in the media, The Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg Businessweek. For the better part of a decade, he's been working on a book about some of the most secretive billionaires in the United States, the Koch brothers. His book, Coke Land, is a magnificent piece of reporting. He logged thousands of hours flying to Wichita to interview Koch employees and sort of pierce the veil of silence that surrounds Koch Industries. One of the first things that he writes about in Coke Land that I thought was fascinating is that you could not boycott Koch Industries if you wanted to because they have insinuated themselves into American business in a way that is impossible to extract. They make the fiber in carpets and in your clothing. They make the sensors in your cell phone. They make the nitrogen fertilizer that helps grow the food that you eat every day. Under Charles Koch, Koch Industries has made more money than pretty much any enterprise in the history of the entire planet Earth. He and his late brother David Koch's fortune when combined exceeds that of Bill Gates. In Coke Land, Leonard uncovered the crimes and bending of norms that Charles Koch employed to build a company as large as Koch Industries. He demonstrates how everything is centered on his extremist ideology. Charles is a classical libertarian and I'm not talking about somebody who read Atlas Shrugged once in college. He is somebody who has gone deep. He read about von Mies and Hayek and he's formulated an even further right understanding the government is almost always a negative force on everyone who lives within that country. There are some sort of amazing details in here. I didn't know for example that when they were children, Bill Koch stabbed his twin brother David Koch in the back literally with an African sword that his father brought back from a safari and David later forgave Bill for that as one does. It's the kind of book that is just packed with the kind of details that you only get from doing hundreds and probably thousands of hours of interviews with people who really grow to trust you. It's amazing journalism. There's a passage early on in the book about the Koch's first time busting a union of a petroleum plant that they bought in Minnesota that is, it reads like a thriller. It could have been written by John Grisham, if John Grisham is your kind of thing. It's just sort of a stunning example of how business has continually crushed workers in order to bring higher profits up to the founders of the company. This book is interesting enough on its own, but I think it also serves a great way to examine trickle-down economics in action. All the techniques that we've talked about on pitchfork economics are happening in this book. The ways that rich people keep the money to themselves by suppressing the wages of workers, deregulating their industry, and pushing for tax cuts for themselves. It's kind of an end case example of what goes wrong when we let rich people run rampant at the cost of everyone else. It's one of the best business books I've read in years. I cannot recommend Coke Land enough. Put the holidays around the corner, it would make a great gift. Of course, I would urge you to look it up on indybound.com at your local independent bookstore or if you're interested for yourself, take it out from your local library. Thanks for listening. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.