 Hi there, my name is Paul Constant. I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. I'm also a co-founder of the Seattle Review of Books. I worked in independent bookstores for many years, and books are kind of the center of my life. So here on this podcast, I like to occasionally recommend books that I think our listeners would like to try out. And I have a new one that I'm especially excited about. It's called Neighborhood Defenders, Participatory Politics and America's Housing Crisis by Catherine Levine Einstein, David M. Glick, and Maxwell Palmer. Now if you've ever attended a neighborhood meeting, you've likely seen a crank or two. They like to complain against any progress in their neighborhood, and these are the kind of people who have earned the acronym NIMBY for Not in My Backyard. If you haven't attended a neighborhood meeting, you've likely seen these people parodied on shows like Parks and Recreation. For the purposes of this book, the authors renamed the NIMBY phenomenon with something a little less dismissive. They call them Neighborhood Defenders, capital N, capital D. So this book comes out of a deep study of Massachusetts neighborhood meetings. They selected Massachusetts specifically because they are better at documenting what goes on in neighborhood meetings than other states are. So there's sort of a deep body of research about the kind of people who show up at neighborhood meetings to protest growth or development issues. So we're not particularly talking about Boston or other big cities. It covers all of Massachusetts, which can get pretty rural out in the west, all the way over to the larger urban areas in the east. The authors explore developments like senior centers in small Massachusetts towns, and they explore the tactics and philosophies of the neighborhood defenders who fight development. So it's a deep exploration of the kinds of people who show up at neighborhood meetings to argue against, say, apartment buildings or even duplexes or triplexes. They're largely white and older and wealthy. And over the course of the book, the picture sort of becomes very clear of how the current system has been used to stymie development around the country in some very disingenuous ways. For instance, people who argue against, say, a new neighborhood center because there's a particular tree there. These are people who have no record of speaking up for the tree before. It's not as though they're the Lorax or something like that. There's also a discussion about neighborhood character and how that comes to be a catch-all for anyone who doesn't want anything in their neighborhood to change. So those of us who live in the many American cities that are facing housing crises right now should be interested in neighborhood defenders. It explains how housing has gone from an essential human right in America to an investment that's only attainable to the wealthiest and most privileged Americans. And it's a system that we have to remake if we want to create actual inclusive housing policies that don't privilege a few at the expense of the many. This book, I think, is going to be a great first step for people who want to understand how we got to the point where American cities are filled with tents and rents are skyrocketing. And I think that it provides a really great foundation for how to move forward to – how to change policies to move forward and create a more inclusive America. To be clear, this is a largely academic text. It's got one of the ugliest covers I've ever seen. It's packed with footnotes. It's not written in a snappy sort of pop culture style. It's not a Malcolm Gladwell book. But it is very readable. It's only a couple hundred pages long. It's not like a thick doorstop of a textbook. And all of the ideas are very comprehensible. So while the package may not look like the kind of book that you might scoop up at your local bookstore, it is absolutely something that is clear and concise and important. If this sounds like it's up your alley, I hope you will check out Neighborhood Defenders at your local library or your independent bookstore. You can also look it up at IndieBound.com. And thanks for listening. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.