 My name is Paul Constant. I am a writer here at Civic Ventures and I occasionally host Pitchfork Economics. I'm also, in my spare time, a co-founder of a website called The Seattle Review of Books, which provides news, reviews, and interviews for the Seattle literary scene. From time to time, I pop into your feed with a recommendation of a book that I think you might find interesting. Usually, I like to focus on books that I think demonstrate economics in action in the real world that sort of help illustrate what we talk about here on this podcast. We are always very interested in exploring the central economic question of who gets what and why. That's where Kathy O'Neill's book, Weapons of Math Destruction comes in, subtitled, How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy. O'Neill's a data scientist who has a lot of opinions and facts about the way we're letting algorithms guide our lives. Algorithms are insinuating themselves into every aspect of our lives, from social media, to banking, to real estate. Algorithms sort kids into schools and decide whether or not you can get that credit card that you applied for. They tell us where we can live and which of our friends we can see online. While it's easy to think of algorithms as a dispassionate and impartial referee, like a robot, the thing is that they are programmed by humans and they are shaped by humans. They are just as susceptible to human bias as you and I are. That means all the human problems that we carry within us, racism, fear of the unknown, preference of the status quo, are reflected back at us in algorithms. They're disguised as impartial results handed to us by invisible robots somewhere. O'Neill argues and she argues quite deftly that when you automate the decision of who gets what and why, the problem gets worse. The supposedly democratizing tools of technology are expanding income inequality and racial disparity and we're not even aware that it's happening. In particular what she does really well is on display in some chapters in the middle of the book when she explains how algorithms sort job applicants. By reducing every single decision as a binary up and down decision, hiring algorithms ensure that people who work minimum wage jobs stay in minimum wage jobs. They're keeping poor people poor and not providing the opportunity to advance in careers that we would expect in the American dream. It's a short book, it's an easy read, it's a fascinating look behind the curtain of Silicon Valley startups and how they're changing our social norms. It was originally published in 2016 so weapons of math destruction is kind of in need of an update for our Trump battle times but I would definitely say it's worth a loan at your local public library. It makes you think about the digital world around you and the way that it is sorting you without your consent. In that way the algorithmic sorting recommendations that she writes about here sort of serve as a symbol of the way that economics sort us into our lives every day. As a reminder if you'd like to check out weapons of math destruction I would urge you to find them at your local independent bookstore which you can track down by using indibound.com. Thanks for listening. Thanks for watching.