 Hi, my name is Francis and I'm calling from Texas. I'm just curious, how do we get the presidential candidates to pay attention and to understand the importance of your message? Hi, this is Brian calling from Chicago. My question is about the minimum wage. Hi Nick, my name is Harlan and I'm calling from London. How is it that as individuals we can help change the system and make it more equitable and fair for those around us? Thanks and once again, love you guys, all the best. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. One American capitalist take on how we got into this mess and how we can get out. So today on Pitchfork Economics, I am joined by my friend Trey Crowder, the comedian and super excited to do an Ask Me Anything episode. Trey is visiting from Los Angeles where he lives after having grown up in Tennessee. Yeah, I was going to say, you can tell by my accent, I'm from Los Angeles. Exactly. It's a very strong Los Angeles accent. Yep, the south of California. So we have been asking for a long time for our listeners to submit questions. We got a ton of them. We're going to get to as many as we can and Trey and I are going to do our level best to intelligently or at least amusingly answer your questions. Hey there, this is Nick Hanauer. You've reached the magic voicemail box where you can leave me a question for my Ask Me Anything episode. All you have to do is state your name, where you're calling from and your question as clearly as possible. So thanks. Greetings, I am Donnie May from Ontario, California. How do you reconcile your views as a capitalist with policies many people would call socialist? Thanks for all you do. Hope to hear from you on the radio. Bye bye. So Donnie May from Ontario, California. That's weird because I kind of just asked you a version of that question like 10 minutes ago before we got on here. And I mean briefly, Trey and I were chit chatting about economics and he wondered how we thought about socialism and the problem is the definition of the word, isn't it? Yeah, socialism is particularly in places like where I'm from, rural America socialism is a dirty word. A lot of people don't even really know exactly what it even means really or doesn't mean. Everybody has their own idea of what it means and a lot of people hate that. Yeah. And here's the thing. I think a lot of people hate socialism for a very good reason because the dictionary definition of socialism is the state ownership of the means of production. In other words, no private enterprise or private industry. And that's an economic system that has been tried in a bunch of places. And it has been a total catastrophe because despite the facts that our existing economic system are imperfect and screwing a lot of people over, markets work a shit-ton better than governments. Governments? Yeah, yeah. You're not saying. Yeah, not markets. But what a lot of people mean when they talk about socialism today, I think, is really reforming our economic system, our capitalist system, into a system where the market works for people, not just for money. And that's a thing that we can very easily do in many ways. That's the purpose of the pitchfork economics podcast. To give more money to more people. Right. And again, there are a lot of people who would claim that socialism. I respectfully disagree. I think the word is a very poor choice for reforming a market system into a better system. But anyway, I think that in many ways what we're talking about here is what people are thinking about when they think about socialism. Just an economic system that benefits everybody, not the few. Right. Hi, this is Mark from Portland, Oregon. And my question is this. I think there's a strong business argument for shifting health care costs from businesses who pay for those health care costs through their employee benefits and paying those benefits. And shifting that cost and putting it onto the government tab. It seems like it would save a lot of money for business if they didn't have to pay those health care costs anymore and it would make them more competitive. Why don't I see that argument being made? Why are businesses so interested in continuing to pay for health care costs? Thank you. Mark, it feels to me like a lot of the opposition to the government paying for health care is because well, that socialism and socialism is a dirty word to these people. My taxpayer dollars shouldn't be going to pay for somebody else's scraped knee or whatever. But to me, my number one thing with this has always been like we're not going to allow people to literally die. And if we're not, then we're going to fix people up. Somebody's got to pay for it no matter what. So we either let people die on the street or the government can just start paying to cover them and costs will go down overall eventually anyway. But I'm mostly talking out of my butt. But Trey, I think you're basically on the right track. The truth is that one of the reasons you're not hearing about moving the health care system to a single payer system, which is what most of the rest of the world does in one way, shape or form, is the insurance in the hospital lobby who desperately don't want that to happen. The insurance industry has about, I think it's up to about three trillion reasons per year to not let that happen. But indeed, if we shifted the burden of health care costs from private employers to a public system where everybody just basically pays into the system and gets their health care via that system, among other things, you could cut out virtually all of the 15% vague insurance, private insurance companies take on every health care transaction, which on almost $3 trillion is $450 billion. And there's a lot of good reasons to do it. But I think at the end of the day, when I think about health care reform, I think of a giant dartboard with all the systems of all of our competing nations on it, Canada, you know, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Germany, Switzerland. And I think the way to solve the health care problem is just take a dart and chuck it and wherever it landed on one of those squares, that system would be better than ours. And we should just do that. Yeah, but none of those countries are the greatest country on earth today. That's true. That's true. They should be throwing darts at us right now. I'm going to correct it. Also Mark, you know, just speaking directly to your question about why business people don't advocate for this, you know, obviously very sensible thing. You know, I cannot answer that. I think part of it is I think Trey is definitely right on about the fear of socialism, right? Yeah, that somehow it will all be worse. I also think that a lot like on an individual level, a lot of people that are opposed to it, they think whether they own a business or whatever, that even if they stopped having to cover their own employees and it went to a single payer system, well, now they'll still, they'll just take more of my money to pay for everybody now. So I'd rather pay for the people who work for me and do things for me than to have to pay for everybody, all the lazy people that won't even get a job. I think that's the mentality of that a lot of them have, which I completely disagree with, but I think that's how it works in a lot of people's minds. And in fact, we are paying for people that we don't employ because the healthcare costs that get spread out anyway. That's what I was trying to say earlier about if you're not going to just let poor people die, then we are paying for it. No matter what, in your insurance premiums. Yes. Hi, my name is Francis and I'm calling from Texas. I recently ran into presidential candidate Hickenlooper in Montgomery, Alabama when he was there visiting the Museum for Peace and Social Justice. And of course, I took the opportunity to mention Pitchfork Economics to him because I really feel like that would be a winning message for anybody who's running for office. And he said, oh yeah, I know Nick. And then he said, you are an interesting guy and you had gone far away. And he also, when I suggested that you were a billionaire, disputed that and said he didn't think you were a billionaire. So my question is, how do we get the message out that neoliberal economic policies continue to hurt all of the middle class and the working poor? I think if a Democratic candidate would embrace the messages that you so clearly explain, they would have a much better opportunity at defeating the incumbent president. So I'm just curious, how do we get the presidential candidates to pay attention and to understand the importance of your message? Thanks so much. I enjoy your show. I look forward to every single episode and tell everyone I know about it. Have a great day. Keep up the good work. Francis from Texas. I think she's really on to something, something that's annoyed me for a while just in general when it comes to the Democratic Party or the left in this country is that the left for a long time was the party of poor people, the party of working people, the labor party, and they're just kind of not anymore. And I thought there's a major opportunity there for the left to gain some ground back in places like West Virginia or Oklahoma with the teacher strikes and that type of thing. And I think people would be receptive to these types of economic arguments if the left gave enough of a... Can I say shit? If gave enough of a shit to talk about them to begin with, I think it's a huge hole in their strategy so far as far as I can tell because I agree completely they should be starting to deconstruct all of this stuff to the people who need to hear it the most. But as far as how they should best go about that, why don't you tell me and Francis. Well, first of all Francis, I really am so appreciative of you representing me to John Hinkenlipper who I know and like. I think it's hilarious that he thought I was too far left, but I'm not surprised by that because the Democratic Party that John is sort of a big part of has been notoriously wrong on economic issues for a generation. Make no mistake, if you're a middle class person, you've gotten screwed over the last 40 years, but you're screwing from Democrats and Republicans alike because the best the Democratic Party has been able to muster is some form of sort of trickle down light. Trey, you should talk a little bit about where you're from and the marvelous job that Clinton's did for you. The briefest Cliff Notes version of it is I'm from a really small town in Tennessee. The beating heart of that town's economy for decades was this big clothing factory that right after NAFTA passed, packed up and moved to Mexico, which I know that kind of became like a false narrative, Mexico took all the jobs or whatever, but in the case of Salina Tennessee where I'm from, that's literally exactly what actually happened. The town has never recovered from it, crime and opioid abuse and all that, just skyrocketed things are terrible there now and have been over 13% unemployment for like 20 plus years now. It's just been utterly devastated. Most people there blame Bill Clinton, but then just the Clintons for that to this day. They were never going to go with Hillary after everything, even when the alternative was what it was, they were never going to go with Hillary because they blame the Clintons for what happened, neoliberalism for what happened to their home. I get why. I mean, why wouldn't they feel that way? Absolutely, and I think John Hinkenlooper is part of that old tradition of Democrats who believed largely that tax cuts for rich people created growth and raising wages killed jobs. We should just give slightly smaller tax cuts to rich people and we should hold wages down just a little bit less than the Republicans as the distinguishing factor. This podcast is devoted to trying to talk at least some Democrats and hopefully a few Republicans out of those idiotic ideas and into the notion that the most pro-business thing we can do is build a thriving middle class. Indeed, like if the Clintons had approached NAFTA in a better way, your town where you grew up with in the country would be in a far better spot. Very quickly, one other thing. It's a very rural southern community, but Clay County where Solana is in, in every electoral map for years and years and years up until that happened was a blue county within Tennessee. That happened and it's been deep red ever since, basically. I want to address the billionaire thing. I'm not a billionaire. I'm worth less than $1 billion, but many hundreds of things. I'm sorry. I apologize. No, no, no. Lost that third comma. That's gotta be tough. No, no. I have said this. It's on my Twitter. I put it everywhere. Of course, it's academic. Anyway, it's like three people on earth are like, did you hear about Nick? Yeah, yeah, exactly. That's rough. He's in bad shape now. I just want to say that I had tried to be as explicit as possible, as often as possible, that I'm actually worth less than $1 billion, many hundreds of millions, but not a billion. I draw that distinction often and John, maybe he knew. But anyway, but Trey, I still roll pretty good, don't I? As far as I can tell, yeah. Yeah, Nick's doing fine, Francis. Here's the thing in general. We need to, I think what you did with Hink and Looper is how we collectively get presidential candidates to take these issues more seriously. We have to be in their face and communicate that the only basis upon which we will vote for them is if they are devoted to meeting the scale of the economic challenge most people face at that scale. In other words, it's not good enough for him to be advocating for raising the minimum wage from $7.25 to $9 an hour. That is not going to materially help anybody in this country. We need to move it from $7.25 to $15 or $20 an hour. So we all collectively need to be in the face of these public officials to try to drag them, directly back to the center, which is economic policies that benefit everybody. I think, and again, talking out of my ass, but I feel like, and I hope that in a post-Bernie, post-AOC type of work, they better start caring about it or they're not going to have a shot in hell, in my opinion. If they're not appropriately on message as far as taxing the rich and all of that, they're not going to get very far. So it ain't up to me, they need to figure out how to go about it or they're going to be in deep shit if they don't, in my opinion. Hi, this is Brian calling from Chicago. My question is about the minimum wage. I'm a big supporter of a $15 minimum wage, but I get pushback from those nurses, EMTs, that are currently making $15 an hour. How do I communicate and how do I articulate that a federally mandated $15 minimum wage is good for everyone because they deserve a raise too? Thanks. Okay, Brian, this is one of the things that pisses me off more than anything when it comes to economic problems because he's 100% right. I know a lot of these people too. You start talking about raising the minimum wage and you start hearing people, he said EMT is a perfect example that are like, why should a teenager flipping burgers get paid $15 an hour when that's what I get paid for saving lives? Does that sound fair to you? And it's like, that's not what any of us were saying, man. We're not saying that the burger flipper deserves to make as much money as you do for saving people's lives. We are saying that you both are getting fucked and deserve to be paid more and treated better. Both of you should be getting more. Just because you're getting fucked over doesn't mean that that kid should be getting fucked over too. You know what I mean? I don't understand. Everybody has this... Maybe it's like a human nature thing. We want to make it about their situation compared to someone else when we're trying to fix things for everybody. Yeah. But Brian, I think you raise a super good question and this policy does antagonize people. I've had exactly the same questions. The reason that that EMT is only making $15 an hour is because the floor is so low. What would happen over 40 years is they kicked the foundation out from under the house and everybody wonders why the floor is collapsing. Well, if the foundation is solid and high and rising, well, everything above it will do well too. The quicker we can raise the minimum wage of $15 or $20 an hour, the quicker that EMT's wage will go from $15 to $30 an hour or $40 an hour. Does the dynamics of the labor market adjust to it? I mean, so everybody in the country has a stake in raising the floor as high as we can because people who are in the middle now will be compressed upwards in the same way that they are. So, anyway, I mean, that's the basic story, but I'm deeply sympathetic to the pushback you're getting because I've gotten it myself. Yeah. Okay. This is William Smith, I'm calling from Decatur, Georgia, right outside of Atlanta. When we talk about the health of the economy, are we talking about the wealth and prosperity of the rich or are we speaking of the economy as a separate entity in and of itself? And an even greater question would be because of the fact that it really doesn't matter whether it's the former or the latter. The largest participants in the economy, namely the poor, are never even considered in that calculation. So, the greater question is how do we include the poor into a discussion about the health of the economy? And I think that by doing that and making that the way that we report on the overall health of the economy can change the dynamic of how the poor are considered in our society. Thank you. Well, William, I think it depends on who's talking about the economy, but without a doubt, a whole lot of people when they talk about the economy definitely are talking about the wealth and prosperity of rich people. I mean, like the stock market, when you talk about what the stock market's doing. Like in my hometowns, like you see, the stock market's really surging. It's like, oh, great. I still got to help my meanwhile get her pills or whatever. Or the opposite, like the stock market crashes and it's like, okay, whatever. I literally have no idea what that means. It means nothing to me. But it's still used as this metric on a national scale. So I mean, there's no denying or arguing with the fact that a lot of times when people talk about the economy, that is what they really mean. It's the wealthy and how they're doing. I couldn't agree more. And William, you're really on to a very, very important thing, which is how we characterize whether things are going better or worse. And if you think about all of the basic statistics we use to measure the economy, sort of in everyday life, like where the stock market is or whether GDP is growing, these things are completely disconnected from the lives of the typical family. I can't remember what the statistics are, but something like 80% of the stocks in the country are owned by the top 10% of Americans. The bottom 60% of Americans effectively owned zero. And GDP has gone up every year for all intents and purposes for 40 years. I think GDP is up astounding, 112% over the last 20 years, but the median income is only up 18%. That's the big problem. And it's completely crazy that the median wage, the amount of money that the typical family makes is not a thing that we really measure. This is the measure of the health of the economy is how's the typical family doing year to year and relative to before? To say nothing of poor people who should be measured in the same way. And in fact, I mean, it is hopeful that there's a movement afoot to measure how different segments of the society are doing simultaneously. So we can see how the richest are doing, how the poorest are doing, how middle class people are doing in a more concrete way. And I think that will lead to better policies because it'll be more obvious to everybody that a few people are winning and everybody else is losing. Right. Yeah, I was gonna say, I don't know the metrics or whatever, but I can tell you right now how the poor people are doing. Not good. Yeah, not good. More at 11. Hi, Nick, my name is Howron, and I'm calling from London. I found out about your podcast through the Young Turks, and I absolutely love it. I was wondering, as much as all of the massive impact can be done through the political process and that has to be done through the political process, I was wondering on an individual level what are our options to really ensure that we're not supporting or we're doing our best to support more progressive economics? Where do you stand on, whether it be charity or maximizing personal wealth, how is it that as individuals we can help change the system and make it more equitable and fair for those around us? Thanks, and once again, love you guys. All the best. So, Howron, thank you for the question. It's awesome, by the way, to have somebody calling in all the way from Mary old England. That's cool. I have a very strong view on this. As a, you know, as a philanthropist, which is kind of what I am now, there's all sorts of ways to make change in the world, and one of them is to give money away, which tends to be ameliorative, kind of, what did you put it early? Treating the symptoms and not the causes. Or getting at the structural problems, which always is at the intersection of policy and politics. And you know, the thing is that that involves a particular kind of work plan, but it also involves creating conflict that lots of people don't like to have. You know, the thing about deep social problems is that they are always a product of a particular arrangement which benefits the hell out of somebody. Right. Right. There's a reason that there's a bunch of poor people and a few rich people and core among the reasons is that the rich people really like the current arrangement and are going to resist the hell out of changing it. And so if you want to really make a difference, of course, you can't, there's all sorts of nice charitable ways to help people, but if you want to make a difference at scale, you're going to have to change the system and if you're going to change the system, you are going to, you're going to be in the politics business, which is what our team at Civic Ventures do. Basically, it's a team of political professionals that run campaigns and build narratives and shape policy, you know, because that's the way to do it at scale. At scale for sure, and I could be wrong, but I felt like the caller was, you know, like what can he do? Like a day to day person who agrees with you on all of this, what can they actually do differently to sort of, you know, help in whatever way they can? Yeah. And even if that's not what he meant, that's what I'd like to know. Yeah. I mean, yeah, you know, I think that that's fair. I think you do have to be involved in politics. You have to... Which I think is a good thing to tell people anyway. Yeah. Get involved, get involved. I think that can only lead to better things. That's right. Like there's a reason that your political leaders have enacted policies which have benefited people other than you. And that is because they did not hear from you. You were not involved. You did not like scream outside their door and say, no way, hell no. You know, folks weren't in the streets protesting and complaining about a set of economic policies. That benefited the rich and disadvantaged the many. And if you want to change it, you have to personally get involved. There's no alternative. Now I'm personally blessed to have the resources to stand up my own political apparatus. That's how I decided to get involved. And so I have this wonderful team of people who know how to run campaigns and build narratives and beat the shit out of politicians if we don't agree with them. But everybody can do it in their own way, at their own scale. And I wish there was a handy way not to do that and get the effect that you want. But I just, sadly, I think that that's just what you got to do in every way you can. Well, I mean, that's kind of your whole deal with the pitchforks, right? Is that, you know, that's what eventually is going to happen. What's going to have to happen is regular people coming together and saying they're not going to put up with this anymore. Right. Hi, Pitchfork. This is Leslie from Detroit. And I was wondering how modern monetary theory would explain the 2008 economic crash. Okay. Thank you. That's way above my pay grade, Leslie, for sure. Nick, I don't know how you feel about it. So, I saw a pretty good movie, I think, was about that. A couple of them. Yeah. I think that's a big, short margin call. I don't know how accurate they are, but I recommend those. Anyway, that's my time. You go ahead. So, you know, in a sense, we solved the 2008 crash with modern monetary policy by just creating a bunch of money and lending it, unfortunately, to the financial system to prop it up. By unfortunate, I mean we could have taken that huge pile of money that we invented that the government printed into existence, and instead of bailing out the banks, bailing out the consumers who had been defrauded by the banks, and we would be much better off as a country, and ideally a whole bunch of banks would be bankrupt, and we would have new banks. But I do think that... Yeah, it's kind of like, the banks are all in trouble, they're all dying, what are we going to do? I don't know, somebody call the banks. Yeah, exactly. Exactly, yeah. Tell it. I say, hey, let's go to the banks, see what they think we should do. Yeah, it was really stupid to make a bunch of bankers richer. But why do we do that? Neoliberalism, right? Because the prevailing neoclassical economic thinking was that that was the only option available to us, and that the richer the rich got, the better off everyone will be. But sadly, we didn't have the courage at the time to make the investments that we made in our country bigger. We could have doubled the size of the investments we made in the country at the time of the crisis, and if we had, we would have emerged from the crisis quicker, and everybody would be better off. Well, briefly, I actually was kind of directly involved and impacted by all that, because I was getting out of college right around the time of the crash, which was hugely a good time to be graduating college. That really worked out well for me. But the only reason I found a job is because I found a job that was funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. And it not only gave me and a bunch of other college graduate jobs, but the job I had was administering all these grants that went to American cities and towns, specifically for renewable energy projects. So they put a lot of money into making the city hall more efficient or putting in all new streetlights that are more energy efficient, whatever, any number of things that were genuine actual improvements that are still there today, that were long-term improvements and actually did good things. It makes me kind of biased about it, except for the thing is, like you said, the amount of that that we did, which was effective, was dwarfed in comparison to the amount of that money that we printed that was just given to the banks or whatever. They did a little bit of that, but not nearly enough. They could have just done all of that type of thing. So how old were you when you did that? Twenty-three. So you flew around the country giving away the government's money. Yeah, actually, my- You must have cut a very impressive figure. Yeah, you're so right. My area was the Pacific Northwest, actually, coincidentally. So I go to Bellingham or Tacoma or wherever. And yeah, I'd walk in the door and they'd have a whole team of city engineers and the city managers and stuff sitting there. And then this 23-year-old walks in, he's like, hey, I'm from the DOE. And the looks on their faces, man, are just like, oh my God. Okay. This is what the government's sending us right now. But it all worked out for them, I hope. I don't know. I have no reason to say that, actually. But I think it worked out. I hope it did. But yeah, you're right. People were duly abreast. Yeah, vastly disappointed when I showed up. Yeah, it happens in my comedy shows a lot, too. You mentioned it. Anyway. Awesome. Hi. I've been curious. I've asked a lot of people this question and no one has ever been able to give me an answer. When the stock market goes up and generates value or generates wealth, where does that wealth and that value come from? And if the stock market drops 10%, where does that 10% value go to? That's never made sense to me how the stock market can grow seemingly out of nowhere. So if you could answer that, I would be eternally grateful. Thank you. Well, I can tell you this, dear caller, you can take comfort in knowing that you're not at all alone in having these questions. That's what we were saying earlier. To most people, they feel exactly like the caller did. It's all just words and numbers that don't mean anything to most people. So I think most people would like to know the answer to this question. Yeah. It's a super interesting question. It's a very complex question about what the economy is. What's super interesting and is probably not a very satisfying answer is that the economy is just a bunch of ideas. The economy is imaginary. It's just numbers. It's just a shared fantasy. When I hand you a dollar bill, that dollar bill is worth a dollar because we in our minds have agreed that it's worth a dollar. You're taking me back to college bong session talks right now. It's like none of it's real, man. Just a lie. It's all a lie. It's only real because we say it's real. Really you were right in the bong session is that it is all a lie. The economy is what social scientists call an imagined order or an intersubjective reality. What is an intersubjective reality is it's a set of subjective ideas that we agree about. The legal system is another great example of just an imaginary system. I mean time is kind of that way with days of the weeks and months and all that. It's all just stuff that we just made up and we're all like, yeah, that works. We'll go with that. Now July is a thing. Obviously one thing that is real with respect to time is day and night. It progresses. Space time exists, but our whole system surrounding time and the way we talk about it and all that, we just made up. Exactly. In the same way that we just made up the idea that the minimum wage should be $7.25 an hour, when the stock market goes up, that is just the product of our collective greed and fear and imagination. Indeed you can monetize that increased wealth. Let's say if you own a stock for $10 and the world all of a sudden decides it's worth $100 and you sell that stock and you buy a car with the money you made, indeed you converted that increased imaginary wealth into actual wealth. Again, if it goes from $100 to $10, then you lost that money. The thing about the human economy is that it is in our imaginations, in our shared imaginations. The reason that's so important to understand is that means we can change it. That means we can collectively decide that the minimum wage should not be $7.25. It should be $0.15. We should also decide that it is reasonable for wealthy people to not spend 20% of their earnings on taxes, but 40% or 50% or 60%. That arrangement, that social arrangement is preferable. I hope that answered your question in a moderately reasonable way. Trey, what did you think about answering all these crazy questions? I really wouldn't know because I don't think that I answered very many of them. I think you did a great job of answering them and I'm just glad to have been here for it. No, I had a good time and I learned a lot. I could talk about this type of stuff all day because growing up, that's how we got sort of hooked up in the first place because just by nature of my life experience, I've always felt like this stuff is really the key to everything. I'm just glad to be here. When we're listening to these questions and talking about the answers, as you think about it and I'm droning on in my technical way about what's going on, do my answers surprise you or does it feel like they contravene common sense? No, not at all. Not for me personally. I think it's just, I have the opposite effect on me normally. You'll say a thing that I didn't know the particulars of, but in my mind I hear it and I'm like, that totally checks out. Of course that's true. Well, because it makes sense to me. It's the opposite of contravening. Yeah, interesting. But obviously not everybody feels that way. We get a hand mail too. I bet. I know a little bit about hand mail. Thank you so much for taking the time out of your comedy career to come talk to us and be part of Pitchfork Economics. Super fun to have you and thank you to all of our listeners from all over the world, which is super cool. Flipping amazing questions. We got, by the way, hundreds of them and obviously we cannot answer hundreds of them. We would be here for like 10 days, but we did the best we could to answer as many as we could. We would love more. If you have a hankering, please call our number and leave a voicemail, 731-388-9334. For all you international listeners, what is the country code? 01? I think that's it. What else would it be, Nick? I have no idea. Other than one. Yeah, other than... Yeah, we're number one. That's right. We're number one. Yeah. So anyway, in the next episode, Trey and I are going to answer even more tricky economics questions. Thanks again for everybody and thank you, Trey. Thank you. I'll see you on down the road. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with Large Media, that's L-A-R-J Media, and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. And one more, you should definitely follow Nick on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always, a big thank you to our guests and thanks to you for listening from our team at Civic Ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach Silk, Jessen Farrell, Jasmine Weaver, Stephanie Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul Constant, Steven Paulini, and Annie Fadley. See you next week.