 It's Goldie here and you regular Pitchfork listeners know that Nick and I can sometimes get off on tangents, especially when we're talking to fascinating guests. And that was never more true than our conversation with George Mambio, where we had a wide ranging conversation on a number of subjects, much of which didn't get into our podcast. And so if you're just like us and you didn't get enough of George, here is the full interview. Enjoy. George, it's Nick. Hi, Nick. How are you doing? I'm good. How are you? Yeah, great. Thank you. Busy times. I mean, things are really kicking off now and it's really interesting. It's delightful. Did you happen to see the, there's a giant facing page in today's financial times that says capitalism needs a reset. Did you see that? No, I didn't. Were you responsible for that? No, sadly. Maybe we're both directly. By the way, George, I'm joined here by David Goldstein. We call him Goldie. Hi, George. Hello, David. Goldie, nice to meet you. Good to meet you after reading your book and some of your articles. Yeah. So, George, it's so nice to talk to you. We had such a fun time together in Edinburgh. By the way, I'm about a third of the way through your book, Poisoned Arrows, which is just an astonishingly interesting and ridiculous story. But we're so pleased to have you on the podcast, which is devoted to trying to help people understand both neoclassical economics and neoliberalism and getting them to see these things, these sets of ideas as human created constructs that for today largely take the form of protection rackets for rich people. And your work on neoliberalism in particular has been so interesting and attractive to us because you characterize it so well. Yeah, but before we get into any conversation, we need to get your slate first. So, if you could just say your name, tell us who you are, what you do, and plug whichever book or books you want to plug. I'm George Monbiot. I'm a journalist and campaigner, professional troublemaker or so I'm told. I write about a wide range of subjects, particularly environmental, political, economic subjects, really all the stuff which I find fascinating and I think is important. I read a few books. The latest one is called Out of the Wreckage, which as the name suggests, tries to navigate a way out of the multiple messes and chaos that we currently find ourselves in. So I actually came across your writing helping Nick with a book he's working on and we had a chapter on narrative and a piece of yours in which I thought you had the best definition of neoliberalism that we'd come across, this idea of reducing everything to competition. If you could go in, I guess starting point, tell us at least from your perspective what neoliberalism is and then we want to get into where it came from. It's an extraordinary thing. The cleverest trick the devil ever plays is pretending he doesn't exist and this is what neoliberalism has done to great effect over many years. When the doctrine was first hatched, particularly in the 1930s and 40s and 50s, people were quite happy to call themselves neoliberals, but gradually that name disappeared and they almost pretend that there is no such thing and yet it has become the dominant doctrine that governs our lives. We call it other things. We call it Reaganomics or we call it Thatcherism, depending which country we live in. We just think that it's spontaneously emerged, but it's not. It's a very deliberate and well-crafted ideology that's been worked on by many people over a long period. It started with the work of people like Friedrich Hayek and Ludwig von Mises and ultimately it's a doctrine which says that competition is the defining feature of human life. That we are fundamentally selfish and greedy, that these are good things because our selfishness and greed can be harnessed to make us all richer, that society should really be governed by buying and selling and our interactions should more or less be reduced to commercial interactions. And by that means we can, it claims, make the best decisions because what buying and selling does is to create a hierarchy of human worth. We can determine who are the best and most worthy people and there's a very easy way of determining that because they are the richest people. The people at the bottom of the heap, the poor, well, they are inherently undeserving. How do you know? Because they are poor, because they have failed in the great human competition. And anything that tries to interfere with the discovery of that natural order through buying and selling such as government intervention, regulation, taxation, trade unions, that must be stamped out to allow the whole of society to become a kind of market. That's the theory, that's how it's supposed to work and apparently that is supposed to deliver us from bureaucracy, from red tape, from chaos and create a kind of utopia in which the invisible hand of the market ensures that we live in the best of all possible worlds. The reality is that it doesn't quite work out like that. And to be clear, this is not a narrative that emerged organically. It was intentionally designed as a counter narrative to what they feared was this scourge of socialism, either the kind in Stalinist Russia or the democratic socialism that we were seeing in Europe. Yes, that's correct. I mean, when Friedrich Hayek wrote his book, The Road to Serfdom in 1944, he basically considered any attempt to intervene in markets or to create welfare systems, social security systems was the slippery slope towards totalitarianism. And even such apparently mild interventions as the US New Deal or the beginnings of a social democratic welfare state in the UK would inevitably lead to Stalinism or Nazism or other forms of totalitarianism. And a slightly extreme and crazy belief, which was really very marginal to begin with, attracted a lot of extremely rich people because they thought, well, you know, a world in which there's hardly any tax, hardly any regulation, no trade unions. That's a great world for millionaires. That's a great world for corporations because we can be free. So they started talking about freedom. But they were very careful not to specify freedom for whom. Now there are many kinds of freedom which we can exercise without intruding on anyone else's freedom, freedom of speech being a classic example. If I speak freely, it doesn't stop you from speaking freely. Well, at least if I ever shut up, it doesn't. But there are other freedoms which intrude on other people's freedom. So for instance, if I say I want to be free from labor regulations, I don't want my workers to impose on me with their demands for holidays, for sick pay, for weekends, for contracts, for pensions, then that freedom which I've acquired is actually a massive cost and an imposition upon my workers who then find themselves without economic freedom, without security, without a lot of the good things in life. Their freedoms have been restricted. If I'm free to pollute the river or to pollute the atmosphere, other people are not free from the impacts of that pollution. In fact, that pollution can be a terrible imposition on the lives of other people. If you pour your toxins into the groundwater, we are not free from poisoned water. So your freedom detracts from our freedom. And it's a zero sum game in cases like that. But they were very careful not to say whose freedoms they were talking about. They were just saying freedom as if it makes us all free. And so with the support of some of the world's richest people, Hayek and von Mises and many others started to get together to form what has been described as a sort of neoliberal international. The Mont Pelerin Society in 1947 was where it began, but it quickly proliferated into a massive network of think tanks, of academic departments, of journalists, all sponsored by these immensely rich people to promote these rather wacky ideas and to bring them slowly towards the mainstream. And not only were they promoting them, they were refining them and finding new ways to tell the story so that it became more acceptable to people. It sounded more like common sense and less like something completely crazy. And gradually this completely wacky idea becomes more and more accepted within mainstream media, within mainstream society until people say, oh, well, yes, maybe that's sensible. And then when Keynesian social democracy starts to run into big trouble in the 1970s, the neoliberals were able to come forward with this massive network they'd created, this sort of international network, and say, we've got the answer. We've got this whole new story, which you can adopt. And people like Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan immediately pounced on this and said, yes, this is the answer. And by then it wasn't called neoliberalism. It wasn't really called anything. It was just, it was as if it were a description of a natural process like Darwinian evolution. This is just how society works. And that explains its great power in that they make it sound as if it's not a doctrine at all, as if it's not an ideology at all, as if it's a description of society. Yeah. It's Econ 101. That's what they tell us here. That's right. And our friend Yuval Harari has, I think, quite rightly pointed out that the iron law of history is that these meaning systems, these narratives, what he calls these intersubjective realities are always anchored by one of two claims, either God says, or it's a law of nature. Yes. And neoliberalism and neoclassical economics adopt the former, the latter. They basically assert that these are immutable natural laws, that this is just the way it is. Well, that's absolutely right. And it's highly misleading. I mean, they take a basically Hobbesian view of humanity, which is that we are fundamentally selfish and greedy. But what we've had in recent years has been a vast amount of science investigating just those questions. You know, what are our fundamental values? What are our dominant values? And it's been in neuroscience, in social psychology, in anthropology, in evolutionary biology. And remarkably, all those different disciplines have come to very similar inclusions, that while the majority of people do have some selfishness and greed in us, those are not, for most of us, our dominant values, our more dominant values, our community feeling, our empathy, altruism, kindness towards others, kindness towards our family, kindness towards our neighbors, kindness towards people in general. And actually, we think very poorly of people whose values are primarily selfishness and greed. But there are outliers, there are some people whose values are dominated by selfishness and greed. And unfortunately, a lot of them are in charge. Broadly speaking. Yeah. Yes. Broadly speaking, we are a society of altruists governed by psychics. Yeah. Yeah. So, sociopaths make up about 3% of the general population. About what percent of corporate boardrooms make? This kid was like 25%, wasn't it? It's just so depressing. So a couple of things that I'd like to zoom in on. The first is that on our podcast and in our work, we have decided, we affirmatively adopted the word neoliberalism as the word we would use to describe what we are pushing off against. The ideological level of what we're pushing off against. And I think one of the things that so attracted us to your work is how precisely and usefully you have been able to characterize that set of ideas. And it's a complicated thing, right? There's a lot of different dimensions to what it means, what neoliberalism means. And it's multi-layered and so on and so forth. George Soros, the financier and philanthropist, uses the phrase market fundamentalist. He thinks that's a better characterization of it. How did you end up where you ended up? Well, I have also in the past used market fundamentalism as a description. But it's actually a very good description than neoliberalism. It doesn't completely capture what neoliberalism is about and how revolutionary the neoliberal ideas are. Because actually, you could say that the laissez-faire economics of the 19th century were market fundamentalists. You know, the market should be king, we should leave everything to the market. But this is more than leaving it. Neoliberalism is about creating markets in places where there are no markets before. It's about commoditizing almost all of human life. It's about reducing our relations to market relations. So it's not saying the market as it currently exists should be allowed to do its own thing. It's saying everything should be the market. The market should absorb everything. Then the market is the only legitimate sphere in which decision making should occur. And it's basically delegitimizing politics. It's saying that political decision making is not a legitimate sphere. And in fact, politics interferes with the pure functioning of the market, which is conceived as human society in general. And so actually, politicians should butt out, which is the same thing as saying democracy should butt out. Yeah. So this raises a question for me about... I'm wondering if you think that the Hayek that wrote the Road to Serfdom would embrace the neoliberalism that we have today, because he was arguing... This was a defense against totalitarianism. And it seems to me that this philosophy is leading to totalitarianism. Well, the Hayek that wrote the Road to Serfdom, I think, would have had some very major disagreements with the Hayek who, a couple of decades later, wrote the Constitution of Liberty. The Road to Serfdom at least has a coherent internal logic. It's quite an interesting argument, which you can follow from step to step to step. You might disagree with it, but you can say this is intellectually respectable. It kind of stands up as a contribution to the debate about economics and society. But by the time you get to the Constitution of Liberty, and by the time he wrote that, Hayek had been completely absorbed into the world of the ultra-rich and was basically being sponsored by these immensely rich people. It is completely insane. I mean, it's just a totally mad book, which just is effectively saying whatever very rich people do is, by definition, good. And even when very rich people appear to do something terrible and crazy, because they are very rich and they are therefore the pioneers of society, we should embrace and congratulate and follow them in that crazy thing that they are doing. In other words, the fountainhead. Yes. Well, you know, there's a massive overlap between later Hayek and Ayn Rand and her just bonkers ideas, valorizing greed and selfishness and creating the billionaire as a superhero. This is very similar to what Hayek wrote in the Constitution of Liberty. This is the supposedly nonfiction version of the fountainhead or of Atlas Shrugged. And I mean, it is just as bonkers. It's completely out there as just a crazy and incoherent set of ideas. But it was kind of necessary for Hayek to take that position if he were to reconcile where the very rich people wanted him to be with his previous doctrines. And so he was trying to bridge their position of just wanting complete control and dominance and turning their economic power into political power, which he'd been kind of against in the road to serfdom. He wanted to keep on side with them. I mean, he was basically a pretty spineless guy. He went with power wherever power took him. And he was completely overwhelmed and obsessed with any political leader who might endorse him. The first person to do so was Pinochet, Augusto Pinochet, having before the coup that she oversaw in Chile, where so many people were killed and disappeared and tortured. And Hayek went to Chile and he said, while he was there, he said, I would rather see a system with economic liberty than a system with democracy if I were faced with a choice between the two. Yeah, just the most appalling of secrecy towards Pinochet and his power. And then a couple of years later, when Mrs. Thatcher became leader of the opposition in the UK, she asked to meet Hayek. And she was very complimentary about his ideas and said that she wanted to make them central to her political program. After meeting her, Hayek was asked by Thatcher's advisors what he thought, and they were expecting him to give some sort of thoughtful response and interesting comments on what she'd said. And he said, she's so beautiful. That was a good time. You know what? This gives me newfound respect for Milton Friedman, who at least would talk smack to political leaders if they disagreed with him. So George, let's turn to narrative. So you have this amazing new TED Talk out where I think you do this wonderful job of characterizing the existing narrative and suggest a new one. And maybe for our listeners, can you do that? Well, I guess start with the importance of narrative. Yeah. So, yeah, the first thing to say is that we are fundamentally creatures of narrative. When we try to interpret the world, we don't do so as scientists. We like to think of ourselves as having these rational, empirical minds, and we analyze the data and use it to try to work out what's happening. But you can't actually live like that. I'm speaking as someone who tries to be an empiricist. I've got a science degree. I love science. I love facts and figures. But actually, I recognize that I don't live by them, nor does anyone else. Because if we tried to do so, the complexity of the world would simply overwhelm us. So instead, we use shortcuts. And those shortcuts are what we call stories. We tell ourselves stories and we listen out for other people telling stories, which tell us where we are, how we got here, where we might be going, which gives us a sort of rough approximation of what's going on in the world. Because otherwise, it's just like these massive data streams coming at us every moment of the day. And our brains cannot process the amount that's coming at us. And so we have a sort of predisposition to listen for stories, but not just any story. There are a number of basic plots that appeal to our minds with particular force. And people will argue about whether it's three basic plots or five basic plots or seven or nine. It turns out to be an odd number for some reason. And remarkably, there is one that has worked again and again in politics and religion, to the extent that I think you can quite comfortably say that a political or religious transformation is unlikely to happen unless it can tell a new and gripping story with this narrative structure, with this basic plot line. And the plot line is what I call the restoration story. And it goes like this. Disorder afflicts the land caused by powerful and nefarious forces working against the interests of humanity. But the hero or heroes confronts those powerful and nefarious forces against the odds, overthrows them and restores harmony to the land. That's a basic structure of the restoration story. And we all know these stories. If you read the Bible, if you've read Harry Potter, if you've read The Lord of the Rings, Narnia, again and again, that plot line comes up. It's a very powerful and very common plot line. But it's also the plot line of just about every successful political or religious transformation. There has been across millennia. And it's a plot line which was used extremely effectively, both by Lord Keynes, by John Maynard Keynes, and by the neo-liberals. And that was a big key, I believe, to their success in dominating so much of the world's thought and action. It's also the plot line of a lot of unsuccessful movements. So it's not the only thing one needs is a great story. But that's the... I believe it is necessary, but not sufficient. And so the story the neo-liberals told, it went like this. Disorder afflicts the land caused by the powerful and nefarious forces of the overwhelming state, which by intruding into our lives and taxing and regulating, crushes individualism and opportunity and therefore diminishing the scope of our lives. But the hero of the story, the freedom-seeking entrepreneur, confronts those powerful and nefarious forces and against the odds by creating markets where none existed before, rolls back the state, overthrows those forces and restores harmony to the land in the form of the universal free market. We're creating opportunity and freedom where there was none before. That's the story. And it's very effectively told in many different forms, in long form, in short form, in books, in pamphlets, in videos, in political speeches. Being in a game and a game, it's that narrative which comes up. And so when people were listening for a new story, after the Keynesian narrative began falling apart, after the Tronte Gloriers, as the French call it, from 1945 to 1975, when everything seemed to be going right, there was high rates of economic growth and everyone had a job and there was lots of investment in public services and this sense of no one being left behind. And then after 30 years of that, it all started to fall apart a bit. Things went badly wrong. Inflation and capital leakage and many other issues afflicting that Keynesian model. People started listening out for another story and the neoliberals had spent that 30 years working up their story until it was ready to be told very simply, very powerfully. And they were intentionally waiting for that moment. I mean, Friedman is on the record saying, you know, we were waiting for this opportunity, we were the ones with the alternative ready to go, packaged. He actually said in the early 1950s, this might take a generation, but we will get there in the end. And boy, he was so right, they did, you know, and they had the long view, they knew exactly what they were doing and they knew they almost created a sort of algorithm for political transformation. You know, because they had those vast resources, they had so many people working on it who were paid to work on it through the think tanks, through the academic departments, within the neoliberal newspapers. They refined it and refined it until they knew that they were going to succeed. Now, you know, then neoliberalism hit the buffers big time in 2008, where it basically just collapsed intellectually, it was exposed as intellectually bankrupt, as socially bankrupt, environmentally bankrupt, and above all, plain bankrupt. And, you know, you would have thought, right, this is the moment at which the new narrative takes over. So we all said, right, you know, we need something completely new. And it is, oh, oh, oh, oh, dear, you know, we don't have a new story. And so we face this extraordinary situation where, you know, it's now 11 years since the collapse of Lehman Brothers. And we're still stuck with that failed catastrophic ideology. And we're stuck with it because we haven't replaced it with a new story. Yeah. And the best alternatives are either a kinder and gentler form of neoliberalism, or trying to go back to Marxism or, you know, you know, or Keynesianism. Yeah, yeah. Right. Exactly. And one of the rules of politics is you unless you're a fascist, you can't go back. Some reason the fascist can keep you in bed with fascism. But no one else could go back. You know, it's like you try to sort of say, you know, in my father's day, this was what we did. And so let's revive this. You know, young people just say, oh, go off. You know, we're just not interested. Yeah, that that that that that went out with with braces and stiff collars. And it's really you can't excite and galvanize people unless you've got a new story to tell. Well, we got half the story, half the story. They've identified the villains. I mean, I think that's why Occupy Wall Street captured the imagination. It's where Bernie Sanders has gotten a lot of his support to some extent, even even Trump when he ran, you're identifying the villains. They just don't have the second part of the story, which is how we're going. The story, you are right. But of course, you know, it is meant to be a restoration story. It is meant to put things right. It is meant to bring return, restore harmony to the land, but in a new way, in a way which hasn't been done before. And in fact, I think we've got more than half. We've got other little fragments of that story. There's been so much fascinating new work on economics, mostly critique, but also some good new ideas, really interesting stuff on social transformation, on rebuilding community, and really great deep thinking about how we frame the way we live, the metaphors we live by, amazing work, above all, I think, by Jeremy Lent in his book, The Pattening Instinct. So we've got sort of fragments of the story. We're sort of part of the way there. And I don't believe it's going to be produced by one grand old man scratching his beard. I think that era is long past, and thank goodness it is. I think it's going to be produced by lots of people bringing their minds together and their different life experiences and their different specialisms and starting to work up something which is not only a good and powerful idea, but it's actually properly grounded in the real world, where you can show this works. Here is the practice showing that this works. And I'm very interested in the commons. I think that that is going to be a big part of it. It's this massively neglected part of economics. But there are some really very interesting people, indeed, who are beginning to work on how we can extend this notion of the commons into many areas of life. And just today, I was meeting with David Bollier and Silke Helfrich, who have written this new book called Free, Fair and Alive, The Insurgent Power of the Commons. And they make some really powerful arguments. I think that's part of the story as well. But what we need to do is to bring all these disparate parts together and turn them into a coherent, compelling, short story that you can explain as quickly and easily as I explain that neoliberal story. Well, it's a lot of the work which we're trying to do here in the office. It was interesting reading your book. I don't know that we've turned to the commons, per se, as that part of the story. I think we're more on revitalizing democracy as part of the solution, the role of government. It's a collective action. Yeah. I mean, I think the heart of the new story, and George, I think you rightly identify this, is in a reimagination around the fundamental nature of humanity, human behavior. And thank you, by the way. We spent months trying to craft that into Nick's TED Talk, and then you get up on stage right before him and steal Nick's thunder. Yeah, that's all right. Yeah, but Nick's talk was great too. Really, very powerful and effective. And it's many voices, it's many minds. None of us are going to do this by ourselves. Every one of us is just one part of the dig. That's right. But the new story has to start with an acknowledgment that the defining feature of human beings and human society is cooperation, not selfishness. That's right. That it is our inherent reciprocity that is at the heart. It's reciprocity, which is the hidden hand of the market. And the science shows this very clearly. Yeah, absolutely. It's unambiguous. It's inherently reciprocal beings. But not just reciprocity, actually. I'd like to just point out that actually the remarkable findings are not just that we're really good at reciprocity, but we're really good at nonreciprocal altruism as well. Absolutely. When you give money to a homeless people, you don't expect that homeless person to give you money back. We do a lot of things which are firmly in the category of nonreciprocal altruism. And in fact, to understand human nature, we have to see that clearly, that this is something quite remarkable and very different from what the great majority of animals do. That's right. And that from that starting point, you can build a new story about... I mean, because to restore order to the land, is that your phrase? Yeah, restore harmony to the land. Harmony to the land. You have to essentially have an affirmative theory of prosperity, which is what order is. Order is prosperity. And that affirmative theory of prosperity is that it is the cooperation generated by our fundamental nature to care for one another that is the source of all prosperity. And then by building a society based on that proposition and designed around that proposition, that's how we... The prosperity comes from complexity. The more prosperous our economy becomes, the more complexities. And those increasing levels of complexity require ever larger degrees of cooperation. And that ever larger degrees of cooperation among strangers requires increasing levels of trust. And all of that is grounded in our fundamental, prosocial nature. That's right. And that is the moral creatures that are really sensitive to injustice and justice. That's right. And that is a very different way of looking at the market than the neoclassical neoliberal model. That's right. Which is why it's justice, not selfishness, that is the cause of harmony and order and prosperity. And in fact, it's a feedback loop that as the economy becomes more just, you get a little bit increasing levels of trust and cooperation and complexity, which makes it more prosperous. Right. And that's the new story, which is the opposite of the neoliberal story, which is... That's right. So the more selfish you are, the better it all will be for everybody else. Yes. So this is why I really want to interest you in the commons, because certainly in the sort of current theorization of the commons and indeed the lived practice of it, everything you're talking about is embodied in that notion. I mean, so a commons consists of three elements, a particular resource, which could be a piece of land, it could be a software platform, community broadband, a community energy cooperative, all sorts of different things come under the category of that resource. It's a particular community that manages that resource. And it's a rules and negotiations created by that community to do so. And it's not the state, it's not the market either, it's not capitalism, it's not communism, it's something entirely different. It is the commons. It's a massively misunderstood concept and it's been massively maligned by people like Garrett Pardon with the tragedy of the commons. He wasn't even talking about a commons. He didn't even know what a commons was. He had no practical or even theoretical experience of it. And it was very striking listening to your beautiful description there of how humans really function and what we look for to create genuine prosperity. I was listening to that and thinking that's a really great description. And actually what you are talking about, every single element of that is embedded within this concept, the commons. You know it's funny, I remember being taught in college that the entire era of industrial capitalism was kicked off in Britain with the closing of the commons. And there's truth in that. I mean I think there really is a lot of truth in that. It was the enclosure of land here, its privatization, shutting the great majority of people out. That then became the basis for capitalism. And we got to recognize that alongside that process came a whole new discourse of human rights, of individual justice, of things that we have also benefited from. You know it's a double edged sword. And in fact very interestingly the people like the diggers and the levelers in this country quickly picked up on this notion of individual property rights and said well if you can have individual property rights why shouldn't you have rights in your own person? Why should not you be your own property? And from that a lot of our democratic and political and human rights have been developed. So you know there is something to be very grateful for there but there's also the recognition that it basically amounted from the outset to the grabbing by a very small number of people of the property in possession of a very large number of people and led to the mass servitude and expulsion and dispossession of very large numbers of people. So for long periods after enclosure really kicked off in this country following the dissolution of the monasteries in the 16th century, roving bands of vagrants moved from county to county being hounded out wherever they went. There were all these new vagrancy laws which basically meant they could be tortured or killed on site. They could be driven away. And people starved to death in large numbers and later on in industrialism in the cities provided a bit of a magnet for a lot of people who didn't have other means of keeping themselves alive but their conditions in the cities were scarcely better than in the countryside and there was this sort of industrial destitution taking place with what was basically slavery in the early factories. And then we exported those models to other parts of the world through our colonies and an enclosure was something that the British originally spread, this notion that we can grab other people's land and call it our land and say that the land itself is our prophecy. This was previously a completely alien notion. You could have property in land, in other words you could have certain rights over a piece of land but that the land itself could be your property was something which was just inconceivable before. It's like today saying this air is my property. The air over this street where I live and over all the other houses, I claim a right to this. The rest of you have no right to it unless you buy some of this air from me. That's how extreme and obscene the concept was when it was first mooted and people were horrified by this notion that you could own the land, the common treasury for all as Gerard Winstanley called it. But that became embedded and it became normalized and then John Locke provided a kind of justification for it in his second treatise, a completely insane justification by the way, which the moment you start thinking about it you just say it's not that it stacks up but it was highly convenient. That was then picked up by the great jurist William Blackstone in the 18th century who provided yet more justifications for it and it was embedded deeply in the laws of both Britain and North America until we just come to accept this system of almost universal ownership of natural wealth by private actors as being just normal and natural in the way things have always been. Absolutely is not the way things have always been. So what you're telling us is that neoliberalism is actually grounded in classical liberalism? It is and it's a sort of extreme version of that and it's a kind of justifying myth. It's a new justifying myth to enable a further enclosure and grabbing of wealth which either belong to everyone or belong to no one and then labeling that wealth as being the exclusive property of a particular person or a particular corporation. And then corporations can then acquire personhood and the rights of human beings but none of the responsibilities that often they have all sorts of legal get-outs which ordinary human beings don't have and demand less and less regulation even as ordinary citizens are regulated more and more with as a stricter laws against protest and all sorts of things that you now can't do in public spaces. And we just see this neoliberalism enhancing those very destructive tendencies within capitalism but not actually enhancing the freedoms that the ordinary people of the land might enjoy as a result of capitalism. So we get the worst of both worlds. Well George, thank you so much. We have our final question. We always have to ask this. Okay, we ask this of all our guests. Why do you do what you do? Well, that's a very good question. I couldn't live any other way. A few years ago I wrote down what I felt were the activities that made life meaningful and purposive and they were to love and be loved. That of course is fundamental to a good life. They were to learn and to teach, to create and to try to do good. And you could do all that for entirely selfish reasons. Now I don't know which of my reasons are selfish and which might be altruistic but all of those things make me feel like I've got a fulfilling life. So it's a sort of selfish hedonic reason for that. But it feels fulfilling because it happens to align with what I think is a map for creating a better world. And so if I were to stop doing what I do, I would be miserable because I would feel that my life had lost much of its meaning and much of its purpose and much of its delight. And actually doing all those things fills my life with meaning every day. And because I have to basically roll in the shit of humanity, I mean that's my job. I write a column for the Guardian about all the terrible things that we're doing and what we might do about it. My life could be really miserable. I have to confront a lot of things that other people can turn their faces away from. But actually my life is quite wonderful. It's fulfilling and rich and delightful because I'm engaged every day in these questions. It's fantastic. It's a fantastic answer. We're going to give you an A for that answer. Yeah, thank you for being so engaged. Yeah, George, it was wonderful to catch up with you. I'm not sure when I'm next going to be in London, but hopefully sometime this fall. In any case, thank you again. Take good care and we'll talk soon. Thanks Nick. Thanks Goldie. Real pleasure to talk to both of you. Really brilliant. Thank you. Bye bye. Bye bye. Bye bye. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate, and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.