 I mean, we're bombarded with anti-union propaganda daily. I like to think of the story of my maternal grandfather, who was born in poverty and who died as a member of the great American middle class. Everybody in the country feels like they're working harder than ever before, but falling farther and farther behind. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, an honest conversation about how to make capitalism work for everyone. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm Jessyn Farrell, and I'm senior vice president at Civic Ventures and a former state legislator. So Jessyn, today on Pitchfork Economics, we're going to talk about wage suppression. Wage suppression and the decline of worker power. What has happened over the last 40 years? Well, a lot of crazy things have happened. I mean, this story is pretty simple that for most of the middle of the last century, when productivity went up, wages for the typical family went up, wages for basically everybody went up, and then in the middle 1970s, neoliberalism came along and all of that began to change. And we either stopped doing the policies that kept wages tracking with productivity and economic growth, or we instituted a new set of policies that decoupled wages from productivity and growth. And as a consequence, the country did not stop growing. The growth rate essentially stayed the same, but for most families, certainly for the bottom 90% of Americans, wages essentially stagnated. And the statistics are pretty astounding. Yeah, it's pretty astounding. Since 1979, the bottom 90% of the American workforce has seen their pay shrink as a percentage of their total income. And I think especially telling about this is it wasn't driven by apolitical market forces, right? The weather didn't blow in. It was that there was a concerted attack on worker pay. Yeah, and worker power, which is where pay comes from. Definitely one of the themes of the podcast is that the neoliberal idea is that there are these immutable physics-like economic forces at play, and the market is always right, and you are paid exactly what you're worth. And if you only make $7.25 an hour, then that's because you deserve $7.25 an hour. And if a particular group of people had their wages flattened out, well, then that's because that's all they're worth. And if my wages went up 10% a year, but your wages only went up one-tenth of 1% per year, this reflects the relative difference in the amount of value we're creating in the society, and that's just mostly complete nonsense. And it's nonsense. And we know it's nonsense because if the policies that had been placed in 1979 had held constant, workers would have $1.35 trillion additional dollars in their pockets. And that's very conservative. And very conservative. That's just the change in their labor share to say nothing of increases in corporate profits and shifts in wealth shares and so on and so forth. Right, not to mention changes in tax policy, et cetera. So things are probably a lot more dire than that number. And so, I mean, this is why everybody is so ticked off, is that roughly speaking, if the typical family had fully participated in productivity growth over the last 40 years or 45 years, instead of earning $59,000 a year, they'd earn like $100,000 a year. And that gap is why everybody in the country feels like they're working harder than ever before but falling farther and farther behind. Right, and going back to a point you made earlier that this issue around the pay gap and what's changed is a direct consequence of the erosion of worker power. And when unions were at their strongest before the 60s, they had a real impact on narrowing the wage gap, particularly for male workers. But that spilled over to non-unionized workers too. And we've seen a real sharp decline in worker power and union power since the 1970s. And things have only gotten worse since then. Right. And so, yeah, in the old days, although everybody wasn't in a union, only about I think one in three workers were, there was this massive spillover effect that union wages had a big impact on non-union wages and that helped support the entirety of the middle class. And we see this today in a place like Washington State, which still has very strong unions. We've been able to put in place strong protections for workers. And we, of course, want to see that go even stronger in certain things like the overtime threshold. Right. And there's a tight nexus between the strength of unions and the income of non-union workers as well. Right. And I mean, just not to brag or anything like that. But go ahead. But we have been hard at work on increasing worker power in Washington State and instituting policies that increase wages for working and middle class people. We've done a pretty good job at it among the best in the country. And if you believe the neoliberals, Washington State would be sliding into the ocean that all the restaurants would have closed, the companies would have moved, people would be in potpour, the state would be in disarray. But on the contrary, things have never really gone better. And in fact, we were also tickled that US News and World Report did this analysis that came out recently and they called Washington State. What was it? What did they say? Number one. They said it's something even better than that, which was Washington State is the best state. The best state. That's right. The best state. And again, bringing it back to the topic today, it's that worker power is actually better for everybody. It is. And you see that in an economy like Washington State, which isn't to say that everything is perfect here, which isn't to say that there aren't a lot of challenges, but it could be a lot worse. Yeah. And that's the point. I think that's where I think Alabama or Louisiana or someplace where worker power has degraded quite a bit. Right. And today on the podcast, we are joined by a couple of extraordinary characters. The first is David Rolfe, who is a dear friend and collaborator and is, I think you can say just objectively, is the most successful union organizer since World War II. In the modern era. In the modern era. He's an extraordinarily talented guy and will also be joined by a remarkable guy named Larry Michelle, who is, I think probably the country's leading labor economist. He helped build an organization called the Economic Policy Institute. He's been at this for 30 years or something like that, knows more about labor policy and wage suppression than probably anybody else in the country. He's very, very interesting and fun guy. Yeah. And the two of them, I think together are really interesting because you have David talking about the decline, how to build organizations and decline of organizations. And of course, Larry providing all the research and policy backup to tell the story. Yeah, should be interesting. We are excited to be here with David Rolfe, who is the former head of SEIU 775. And he is going to talk to us today about the history of worker power in the United States and then to talk about what is coming next. So happy to be here. Thank you. And certainly, David, as a labor leader, your life has been essentially confronting power and dealing with power dynamics. And it'll be just fun to hear you reflect on that. I like to think of the story of my maternal grandfather, who was born in poverty and who died as a member of the great American middle class, born in Appalachia not long after the turn of the last century, had nine siblings, no plumbing, at a dollar in his pocket the day he was married. And yet somehow, he went on to own a home, send his kids to college. His widow never had to go on Medicaid for her nursing home care. And that wasn't because of a productivity revolution. And it wasn't because God woke up one day and decided to create the middle class. It happened because he and his coworkers joined together in a union that had enough power to force what was then the world's largest company, General Motors, to say yes when it wanted to say no. And that's how he got fair wages. That's how he got a pension. That's how he got a health plan. And my mother's generation did it again as a classroom teacher, a job that used to be designed only for single women to do for a few years before they got married off, and which paid wages accordingly, became a profession because workers got organized and expressed their power. Now, in the case of my grandfather's auto workers union, it was vis-a-vis a big company. In the case of the teachers who got organized largely in the 60s and 70s, it was vis-a-vis government. And what they had in common was the notion that through collective action, ordinary people could accomplish extraordinary things. Right. And David, you've been one of the most successful labor organizers in the country in what I think is really interesting in an era where the labor movement has been in decline nationally. And so I'd love to hear a little bit about why things have been so different in Washington State, what your work around that has been, and again, in this broader context of what's been happening to labor more nationally. Sure. And I'll apologize if this sounds a little bit depressing, because in general, the fate of the labor movement in the United States is not heading in a great direction. The 1950s, about a third of the workforce was covered under a union contract. Today in the private sector, it's down to 6.5 percent, about 10 percent overall, including public sector workers. Now, in Washington State and in SEIU nationally, there have been some different outcomes. We've seen SEIU grow nationally. We've seen the labor movement grow here in Washington State accomplish some incredible victories. But I think it's important to acknowledge that when the overall trend is towards zero, that no one heroic union or no smart labor leader is going to be able to resist those trends forever. And the reality is that most workers today don't have a path to power on their jobs or in the economy because they don't have an organization that's capable of acting collectively with them and on their behalf. And that's just a feature of the 21st century landscape, one created intentionally by people wielding power against workers. So whether it was the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act that took away most of the most powerful tools unions could use, or whether it was the concerted decades-long assault on unions beginning in the 1970s, we've now seen the fruits of the right-wing labor come to bear. And that is to say, if unions had gone away but we had a thriving, robust middle class and growing incomes and growing job security and longer vacations and shorter work weeks and better benefits, we could all just kind of remember unions as part of the interesting old days. But what happened is we got rid of unions and we largely got rid of the middle class. And those things happen in tandem at exactly the same time because they were causal. Yeah. Hi, this is Zach Burns, one of the producers here at Pitchfork Economics. I just wanted to interrupt here for a second. David was speaking about his father and the opportunities that being in a union afforded him. Unions in this country have vastly disappeared, but there still are some who are fighting for the rights as workers, including the employees at Delta, where thousands are trying to make their collective voices heard. Thus far, unsuccessfully. I spoke to one Delta employee named Dan McCurdy. He's been fighting for years to try to get himself and his fellow employees to form a union. I first asked him why he felt he needed one. I think the reason employees at Delta want a union are to address the things that Delta doesn't address. I mean, Delta is very good about putting out all these awards that they win and all the awards that us as employees win. And there's issues that without union representation, we can't address. So I think that sometimes the public and the people that rate these corporations, they hear what Delta is putting out. And Delta is able to get some spokespeople from within the company to help push their message across. But as for many of us that have issues with some of the work rules with the staffing levels and just with a lot of issues out there, our voice isn't necessarily heard without a union. And I think that it's a little bit unfair to the other major carriers because they're all represented by a union. So United American, whenever they have an issue that they like to or that they need to discuss, they feel pretty confident and free to discuss those issues. And it's not necessarily so with Delta employees. What employees are actually trying to unionize, Dan? We have two groups right now. I'm a part of the blowing group and we consist of around 16,000 people. And we also have our flight attendants that are looking to organize. And we're both trying to organize with the DIA, International Association of Machinists. One thing that I saw was a flyer that was circulating, trying to convince employees to spend what they would pay in union dues on something else like a PlayStation or baseball tickets. And when I first saw it, I thought this has to be fake. But these flyers are actually real, aren't they? It is real. And I mean, we're bombarded with anti-union propaganda daily. There's displays in our break room that have flyers such as this one. We've got TVs in our break rooms that scroll anti-union messaging. We have our hallways were also the anti-union campaign even flooded out into our hallways that are common areas for other airlines. And Delta was pushing their anti-union propaganda there as well. And for any new hire, they go into those new hire classes and they do say that it's a voluntary meeting and that if you don't want to hear it, that you can leave. But if you're a new employee to this company, you don't feel confident that it's in your best interest to get up and walk out. So you listen to what they have to say. And then straight out of the gate, you understand that this is a very anti-union corporation. But what about the 16,000 employees that are trying to unionize? I mean, just guessing what percentage of them want to do it versus what percentage would rather do as Delta wants and just stay non-union. So the Railway Labor Act governs our union elections and we have to get authorization, union authorization cards signed in order to get to an election. We've had, this is information as of about a month, maybe two months ago, but we've had 9,122 employees sign a card, which is more than the 50% required to get to an election. Our problem is that because these cards expire after one year, not all of them are valid. So there's a big game that is played in terms of trying to get them all valid at the same time and obviously Delta trying to stand in the way of us getting cards signed and having them all valid at the same time. Besides just the company kind of having propaganda in, you know, in break rooms and everything like that, what else have they done to dissuade people from unionizing? Have you seen any employees be punished for speaking out in favor of a union? Well, I can tell you that Kip Hedges was, he was a Delta employee and he was terminated about three years ago and I believe that it was for his union advocacy. And so he has, he was pushed off. He had a lawsuit and those terms are not publicly available. They don't put that out, but I definitely feel like his, his termination was over his union advocacy. And just on the inside, I mean, when you work for a company, this anti-union, you know, that, I mean, people come up to me all the time. I went to a MAC commission meeting one month ago and I spoke about Delta putting their anti-union propaganda up into unleashed areas and that our metropolitan airport commission should have it removed. And people came up to me and they said, man, you're going to get fired for saying that. So there's just overall, there's definitely a fear amongst the employees that if you speak out for representation, that you're putting your job on the line. And I don't want to put my job on the line. I do enjoy working for Delta. However, I also understand that we definitely need a union because I too fear for my job for simply speaking out for a federally protected rights that I have. You know, you think about like women's rights to vote. They didn't always have that, but, and now they do. It's not as if they go to the polls and when they vote, they're afraid of something bad happening to them. So I think that it should be the same way for us employees that want to exercise a federally protected right to unionize. There shouldn't be any fear within talking about it. And, you know, ultimately, if we, when we do get to an election, employees get to vote on this. So if it was true that we don't have the support to win an election, Delta has nothing to fear. So it's kind of strange that they are so bold and speak out so strongly against unionization and put that fear in there. Let the employees speak. Let's, let's let the outcome, you know, if it's true that there's not enough. Support that would embarrass me. That would be great for the company. They could use that and say, you know, these employees didn't have the support that they needed. But I'm extremely confident that when we get these cards valid and get to an election, we're going to win it. It's important for folks to recognize that the factory jobs in the sixties and seventies that created, you know, stable, secure, robust, middle class families and lives weren't because those workers were unusually productive. Or were, you know, worked for firms that were unusually profitable. They those wages provided middle class lives because unions provided the mechanism to enable people to folks to negotiate a fair split of the value created by that enterprise. That's right. It was negotiation and power that generated prosper, that broad prosperity, not some, you know, magical elixir of productivity or technology or anything else. Now, which isn't say that productivity is an important and that increasing amounts of technology and productivity don't general in a general way increase human welfare. But if all of the benefits of that increase in welfare accrue to a few people and you can easily leave most people out. And that's the story of the last four years. Yeah. I mean, once again, you could look at an industry that operates globally and ask the question, how do U.S. workers fare working for the same companies using the same machines and the same technology at production facilities in Germany or in Michigan? And the reality is that an automobile worker in America makes not much more than half of what a German automobile worker makes in total wages and benefits. And yet there's almost no difference in the productivity of that worker, right? Largely using the same manufacturing equipment on two different continents. That's right. And I recall the Germans are now making almost twice as many cars as we are paying twice as much, which is kind of an astonishing thing. Yeah. And that right there, that is the power differential because what's true in Germany is that nearly the entire industry is covered by union contracts. And what happened in the United States was that all the growth moved to the south and the west where unions were not as strong. And so workers saw their bargaining power disappear in the United States context, whereas in most of Europe, whatever the union membership levels are, the vast majority of those economies are covered by union contracts. So when I was a little boy, America had the biggest middle class in the world by per capita. Now we're number 27. Germany's number one. Yeah. And we're talking a lot about how we've been tearing down a narrative around trickle down economics and that the evidence is bearing that out. And yet politicians are still deeply bathed in our cultural bath of trickle down. And it's hard to fight those next fights around things like raising the overtime threshold, which is the minimum wage for the middle class. So how do we in a sustained, sustainable way get to a place where worker power is being manifested in the political and cultural dialogue? Yeah, I think there's, it's a great question and there's more than probably more than one thing we could say about this, but I think it's what it's, let's start with what's evident, right? That the decline of worker power expressed through unions has resulted in a 40 year wage collapse that's beset working in middle class Americans. In fact, unless you're in the top 5% of income earners, you have not experienced any of the growth of our economy for the last 40, 45, 50 years. And all of the benefits of the growing economy of productivity growth of GDP growth of growth in corporate profits have gone to the very, very, very top of the economy because workers and everyday families don't have power and not to be too complicated about it. But if the problem is an absence of power, the answer is to build power. And in a democracy, there's, you know, the way the, I mean, obviously if you're fantastically wealthy, you can buy power. If you control armies or police forces, you have a certain type of power. But in a democracy, the type of power that's accessible to everyday families and workers and citizens is the power of collective action. And if Congress and the courts have largely made it impossible for workers to exercise the kind of collective action power that they exercised in the 30s and 40s and 50s through unions, it's really up to us in this moment to not sort of weep for what was lost, but to rather imagine what form of an organization that the government can't stop us from joining, right? That does not rely on permission from our coworkers or our employers or our government. Could we build that would have sufficient scale and power to really reverse the 40-year wage collapse that American families are experiencing? Yeah. Somebody should do that, David. Yeah, somebody should do that. That sounds like a good idea. Yeah, that sounds like a good idea. So it was great to hear David talk a little bit about his experience building up organizations to support and advocate for workers and to listen to both of you talk about the collaborations that you've done. In fact, I've gotten to be a part of that as well. And to really hear about what we need to do to rebuild the working class and the middle class in the United States. Yeah, and from that, we're going to transition to a conversation with the labor economist, Larry Michelle, who will give us, I think, a clearer and deeper perspective on precisely what went wrong with respect to policy. What were the choices we made in our economy, in our economic policy, rather, that led to the decline of wages and worker power? And there were a ton of them. We did a lot of stuff that benefited the few and disadvantaged the many. And nobody knows more about that than Larry Michelle. I can hear you, Nick. Good to talk with you. Nice talk to you, buddy. How's retirement? I'm not retired. I work full time. I'm learning a paycheck, although it's less than what I used to earn, but that's fine. It's more fun, a lot more fun. Larry and I worked together for years and years. Have we won yet? We are getting there. We're winning in some ways. And then, on the other hand, the national picture is quite grim. But you've been at this for 20 years longer than I have. You've been working on the challenge that we call, more broadly, wage suppression. Can you tell us what brought you to that work, Larry? Right out of college, I understood that there was an imbalance of power between workers and managers and the rich, and that that was something I wanted to do something about. I did two things. One, I trained to become a PhD economist, especially in the study of wages and unions. And then I did spend around 10 years as a trade union economist doing bargaining, organizing, and policy work. I wrote my first book on wage stagnation in 1986 called The Polarization of America. And I've been working at EPI since 1987. And we put out The State of Working America every other year since 1988, up until 2012, where we documented ad nauseam, all the degradation of the job quality and inequalities and wage stagnation. Can you zoom out and talk about the dimensions of wage suppression over the last 40 years? Well, people have referred to the phenomena as wage stagnation, meaning that wages have been growing very slowly, or not at all, in inflation adjusted terms for many years. This started in the 1970s. Nowadays, I think it is appropriate to call this wage suppression. Wage stagnation sounds like it's something that just happened. Wage suppression reflects the fact that it happened because that's what the rich and powerful wanted to happen, because it happened because of policy choices, either things they didn't do, like raise the minimum wage or things that they did do, to undercut the ability of people to earn a decent living. So we basically had wage stagnation all throughout the 70s and the 80s and the 90s up until the mid-90s, where it actually did grow pretty quickly in the period of low unemployment. And then back in the 2000s, after a couple of recessions and wages were stagnant again, except for the last three or four years, wages have picked up. So for most of the last 40 years, wages have not really grown so much, and we know why. It's because we kept unemployment way too high for way too long. We can labor standards, like the issues that you work on, Nick, the overtime minimum wage. We saw the attack on unions. We saw a particular form of globalization. And we saw the expansion of a financial sector and the escalation of executive pay, which helped drain a lot of the money from everyone else up to the top 1%. So let me just describe this a little bit to show you how extreme it is. So between 1979 and 2017, the top 0.1%, that's the top 1,000th, saw their annual wages grow by 343%. This is inflation adjusted terms. That's 8% a year. Pretty remarkable. The top 1% did 157%. So that's around 4% a year if you're in the top 1%. Meanwhile, the bottom 90% had their annual wages grow by about 22%, mostly in the late 1990s, mostly in the last few years. The actual 50th percentile worker, the worker right in the middle, had wages rise 0.3% a year. So that's almost nothing. Typical male worker saw no growth in wages over this entire period. This is ongoing. It's not an accident that the top got a lot of wage growth while everyone else got less. If there hadn't been this massive redistribution of wages up the ladder to the top 1%, then the wage growth to the bottom 90% would have grown twice as fast. So redistribution upwards really mattered. So Larry, one of the things you were mentioning was this massive redistribution. And so over that same period, what was happening to worker power then? If you were talking about this not being an accident, it being suppression as opposed to being stagnation, what are some of the things that were going on that meant workers had less say at the table? Great question. So one of the biggest items was that we kept unemployment much higher in the 80s and early 90s, and then back in the early 2000s, much above full employment. And when you have high unemployment, then middle wage and low wage workers are at a disadvantage because employers can find anyone they want with whatever they really feel like paying. So that's a broad environmental thing, but it really, really is one of the most powerful ways of suppressing wages. And it's not an accident because that was what the Federal Reserve Board did in terms of how it set interest rates and monetary policy. It reflected a not really pursuing full employment with government budget policies. And not helpful trade policies which zapped our incomes. So that's one thing. So Larry, I just wanted to dial into that for just a second because it's a really interesting thing to have this Federal Reserve Board in the 1980s really seeming not to be working on our behalf broadly, to have high unemployment and then not having a real impact on workers. Has that significantly changed over the decades? Was that on purpose? Well, the people who own bonds, people who own things are very antagonistic to inflation. And so they really want monetary policy to keep control of inflation, even if it means higher unemployment and very little wage growth for workers. And that policy was the formal policy of the Federal Reserve Board in the 1980s. And for much of the 1990s. And that did helps really suppress wages. Now fortunately, that did change somewhat over the last 10 years. And we had a Federal Reserve Board pretty dedicated to getting unemployment as low as it can. Sometimes they may have wavered a little bit on that. But I think one of the reasons that we have very low unemployment today is that the Federal Reserve Board did not kill the recovery, although sometimes they took a couple of shots at it. Yeah, but there were a lot of policy changes or omissions that contributed to wage stagnation and wage suppression among them that the fact that we basically didn't move the minimum wage at all in concert with increases in productivity growth. Absolutely. And we really haven't recovered from the 1980s where neither Ronald Reagan nor George H. W. Bush allow a minimum wage increase. And so when you have high inflation, as we had back then, the value of the minimum wage fell to basically no value by the late 1980s. And it really drove down wages. And we can see whose wages really got hurt. It was low-wage women. They were the ones who were most dependent upon the minimum wage to support their wages. And so we saw an enormous growth of a wage gap between low-wage women and middle-wage women. Since then, we've had moderate increases in the minimum wage, but as you know, quite inadequate. So the minimum wage in 2018 at the federal minimum wage in states where they haven't exceeded that, but the federal minimum wage is now about 29% below its value in 1968, which is when the minimum wage was at its peak. That's 50 years ago. Since that time, productivity has more than doubled. Now, productivity is the output of goods and services per hour worked. That's what provides the potential for wage and income increases. So the minimum wage, if it had grown with productivity, would be over $20 right now. And it's amazing that it's so low because the productivity is up and the education levels of the people in the bottom are far better than they were back then. One way of seeing how low it is is that it will take a pretty bold policy of getting $15 minimum wage in 2024 to really start turning things around. But even doing that, that only allows the minimum wage in 2024 to be about 30% above 1968 level. So that's like 56, 57 years and a 29% increase is not really all that great. And doing that will directly raise the wages of 40 million workers or 27% of the workforce. So that just shows you how low the wages are that minimum wage is, I think, a very moderate value would raise up almost 30% of the workforce. It would have an even bigger effect if we didn't have around eight states that already have set laws to get people to $15. The biggest ones being your state in Washington, California, New York, et cetera. So it's a huge thing. There's billions of dollars that have been drained from low-wage workers because of the failure to raise the minimum wage. It's the single easiest thing to do to try to spark some wage growth. And this didn't just happen to low-wage workers, but what happened with the middle class during this period? Good question. Well, I mean, wages for a middle-class worker as well as low-wage workers is what we describe when we talk about wage suppression. But it's also been true that in the early 1990s, mid-1990s, wage suppression stagnation really started going to the white collar college-educated workers. In the 2000s, the wages of college grads, someone with a four-year degree, did not grow at all in between around 2002 and until the last few years. And if you look at the bottom, 70% to 80% of college grads, their wages are really no higher now than what they were in 2000. So essentially, at first they came for the blue-collar workers. Then they came for the white-collar workers. And they were very successful. Management has been very successful in maintaining – keep the wages down of their white-collar workforce. Yeah, so this brings us to my favorite labor protection, the overtime threshold. And, Larry, you and I have worked together on this for a long time, the overtime threshold being essentially to the middle class with the minimum wages to low-wage work. And as you know, at the peak of the middle class, the overtime threshold applied to 63% of salaried workers today, and it's now down to, I think, just under 7%, $23,600. And that has been another huge contributor to the stagnation of wages, in particular for middle-class salaried workers. Absolutely. I like to think of it in terms of a manager at a dollar store dunking donuts or whatever earns $35,000 tends to oversee a cashier for a part of their time. They could end up spending a lot of their time unloading trucks, stocking shelves, being at the cash register themselves. But when they work more than 40 hours, they get no additional money. That's what this means. It's not that they don't get the time and a half. They don't even get time. They get zero. The 41st hour is free. So it's not surprising that managers love to be able to make these people not eligible for overtime. And that's what our legal standards have essentially allowed. Now, of course, President Obama tried to raise that and did, but between the courts and the Trump administration, that's been taken away. Yes, and we should argue that what has been done is not high enough and that when you look at the threshold in the 1960s and the number of folks that covered, what we were talking about in 2016 was inadequate, that we should have gone higher. Well, President Obama should have listened better to Nick Canauer. Yeah, that's what I said. So whenever I talk to folks about wages and stuff like that, that conversation always goes to the minimum wage, which is, you know, A, the indispensable labor protection for working people, but also it's the simplest thing to understand. But folks often struggle to understand what the other dimensions of wage suppression have been. And it's hard to explain the things that you can do to help people who are not at the bottom of the wage scale. So to dimensionalize this, one of the things I love to talk to people about are non-compete agreements. And those operate up and down the wage scale, so it's not surprising for people to learn that like if you work for a big software company or a senior developer, that they'll make you sign a non-compete, so you can't basically ever leave the company and go use your skills someplace else. This seems somewhat defensible and tolerable, but one of the most pernicious things that's happened in the economy is that even places like Jimmy John's, a sandwich shop, is forcing low-wage workers to sign non-compete agreements that make it impossible for them to go make sandwiches elsewhere. Franchise agreements up until recently had non-poach agreements. So let's say you were a really good employee at a Burger King. Well, the franchise agreement precluded another Burger King from hiring you, for instance, as an assistant manager at a higher wage. So all of these things, these are little things that sort of are in the background, but they serve to hold wages down and profits high. So in my opinion, one great antidote to a lot of wage suppression would be to make all non-competes illegal. There's no earthly reason why you should have to, any employee should have to sign a non-compete. All it really is is a license for corporations to consolidate earnings and power. So you could easily envision a world in which you couldn't force people to sign non-competes. In that world, workers across the board would have more money and corporate profits would be slightly lower. Well, if you believe in them, that the market should work for workers, not just managers. Even in places though in California where they don't have any legal sanction, they can't be enforced, companies still make people sign these agreements and people still abide by them because they don't have faith that lawyers won't come after them. Well, let me give a picture of how I view an individual worker's situation and how their wages are suppressed. So if you're on the job and you don't think you're getting a good deal, what can you do? Well, you could try to change things on the job through a union, but that's much harder. You could rely on government standards to make sure that you're being treated well, a high bit of a wage, overtime protection, safety and health, but those have been degraded because they've been lowered and they're not enforced. But if you're subjected to sexual harassment or discrimination or racial discrimination, can you take your employer to court to try to get something? Well, those rights have been weakened by the pervasiveness of what's called these forced arbitration agreements, which make people go to a private arbitration rather than the court and for the most part, this allows class action. So let's say you want to leave. Well, you can only leave if there's not high unemployment and you can go to a better job and you're not subject to these anti-boating agreements and you're not subject to the non-competes. So what is really going on is that everyone's situation is such that their options, their better options are ruled out and people are stuck having, because people have to eat. People don't have many assets. They can only last a little bit if they have any kind of emergency. So they can't just quit and wait around for a while. They need another job. So in that situation, you can see how people have to accept what the employers are offering and that's where we are. Larry, we have to hope that there's something we can do, right? That there's another way, that even though it's so hard on people right now, it doesn't have to be the way it is. So what are you thinking in light of the degradation over the last 40 years for people's wages? What do we do next? Well, I think the hallmark has to be that we need policy makers and politicians to identify that getting robust wage growth is the top priority for economic policy. I mean, setting aside climate change, which may be on a different order, but economic policy has to be organized around what we really want is to raise the living standards of the vast working class, low-wage workers, middle-wage workers, and white-collar workers. And their wages should grow. And we do that by prioritizing low unemployment. We do that by having better labor standards, everything from the overtime, everything from the minimum wage, preventing things that draw people back like the non-competes and the anti-poaching. We need to make it possible that everybody, when they sign and when they come to work, they actually understand the agreement. You know, when you get a mortgage, you get this big stack of things you have to sign. When a worker gets a job, they are not, they don't even really know what their hourly wage rate is. Are they eligible for overtime? What kind of money is being deducted by their paychecks? We don't have transparency in employment. You know, we need to not have guest worker visas which undercut tech workers and other workers. We do that for landscapers. We do it for people in hotels, you know, like Trump's Mar-a-Lago. You know, there's so many different things that we need to do. One more. One more to ask is, you know, we have undocumented workers in this country. There's around 5% of the workforce. If you can be exploited in this country, you will be exploited. And undocumented workers, we need to give them full legal rights, right? And that'll help not only them, but it'll help the workers that they work with in the same industries. And unless I shouldn't, we should not avoid the topic of rebuilding collective bargaining. I mean, the biggest single factor that undercut the wages, at least of middle class men, was the attack on unions. And I don't think we'll ever get robust wage growth in the middle unless we reestablish a collective bargaining system. I would also say I don't think we're going to have a vibrant democracy unless we do that. So I want to put that on the table, too. Yes, I would completely agree. This has been a tough 40 years for the American middle class and working people. But I do see glimmers of hope. Certainly, the majority of candidates running for president on the Democratic side in some way, shape, or form acknowledge this problem. And the policy agendas of the majority of them are far more ambitious than anything I've seen in my lifetime. And we have a bunch of younger voices within the party and within Congress that are calling into question the basic foundations of neoliberalism and the last 40 years of wage suppression. And at least we're beginning to have a more robust conversation about solving this problem. And look, I was proud to have Obama as my president. But if we're being honest, he was part of the problem, too. And the Obama folks could have been far more effective and ambitious. Well, we had 16 years of Democratic presidents in the 90s and 2000s. And the Council of Economic Advisers did a report on the issue of worker power and disempowerment in the last year of the Obama administration. Nothing had been done in all the prior years. It just hasn't been a focus of Democrats. And listen, this is about people needing to organize politically, about being active and organized. I think we are seeing bold plans. I really wish there was more focus from candidates on what I would consider wage issues. You get even—I mean, this is an odd situation for me. I spent many years writing and talking about documenting wage suppression, wage stagnation. Starting around 2016, even the Republicans started acknowledging it. And in their presidential primary that year, it was assumed that it's the case. It used to be the case. You still have a few dissenters in conservative think tanks that deny that this is a problem. But politically, no one denies this is a problem. So it really is about people acknowledging the problem and having to rally behind proposals that can make things better. And one reason why it's a very hopeful thing to have this analysis that says it was policy decisions that suppressed wages is that policy decisions are political. It means that things could be different. We may not have had productivity get to the vast majority in the last 40 years, but we certainly can do that for the next 40 years. We have to find a way to engage the vast majority of citizens, the bottom 90 percent of citizens who have been left behind by the last 40 years of economic growth. And we have to find a way to gather their energy and interests and focus them on the political process and to drag, by the way, both political parties, both Republicans and Democrats towards policies that benefit the majority of citizens. And I think that is the indispensable work left to be done to make the economy work better and, you know, in my opinion, save the democracy, too. Yeah. Now, I fully agree with that, Nick. And I think it resonates with people. I think one of the worst things that have happened over these 40 years is I think that sometimes people's expectations of what is possible has been severely diminished. So I think, you know, I think victories and seeing some changes can help really light a fire. I mean, you can sort of see it with the teacher strikes. You know, it works in one place and everybody starts doing it. You know, I mean, anything that's out there that's going to work for people, they're going to sign up for. So that was a super interesting conversation with both Larry and David. And you know, I think it points to another one of the themes of, you know, our Pitch Fork Economics podcast, which is that this isn't just about the economy. It's about the country and our democracy, because if you allow the kind of an inequality that we have today and worse, see it continue to rise in the way that it is, you can pretty much kiss your democracy goodbye. That's right. Yeah. That it is that rising inequality shreds the reciprocity norms that social cohesion and democracy require. Right. And the stakes are really high. I mean, people are hurting. People are struggling to pay their bills, but our democracy is also hurting too. And there's a real connection between the way people feel about their agency in our economy and the way they feel about their agency in our democracy. And we have to protect and support both of those. And what I think was so inspiring about David is all of the work that he's doing to build organizations that drive worker power. And of course, what's so great about Larry is he's been an observer and a documenter and a researcher on what has happened to the American worker for the last 40 years. And no one has a better insight into that. Yeah. And, you know, again, as I, you know, talk to these folks and reflect on it, it just it's so obvious to me why people are so pissed off and why that anger is so valid. Right. Because they have just been so let down by leaders of both political by leaders of both parties and that it is a choice. Yeah. And that both political parties with Democrats and Republicans at all sorts of moments had choices about whether they should support working families or rich people. And in virtually every case, leaders from both political parties took the wrong side. Right. And so, in consequence, most people, you know, there's a reason why not that many people vote anymore. They feel like it's pointless. And if you just look at if you just look at what voting has brought them over the last 40 years, you can't but conclude that they're mostly right, that neither political party has delivered the goods for working for the typical American family. Certainly not on economics. I guess the thing to be optimistic about is certainly people in the Democratic Party are beginning to wake up to this. And as we speak, there's a well, is it, I don't know, 25 or 375 people, whatever it is, a lot of people are running for president now. And almost all of them understand, seem to understand the scale of the problem and are offering economic policy ideas that are way more ambitious and way more complete than anything we saw, certainly from the Obama administration, who is captured by neoliberalism is the Bush administration. That's right. And so, you know, so I think that's really I think that's a cause for optimism. And if I could just add, I think another cause for optimism is the work people are doing to organize themselves, to push for those policies. So not only is the thinking changing of people who are seeking political power, but there's a recognition that without the force of people and organization behind those politicians, we're not going to get anything better. And so that's what I'm inspired by and listening to Larry and David talk today. And I think there's, you know, there's there's there are signs of all a lot of good stuff afoot. So hopefully we'll see some real progress over the next few years on a bunch of these important issues. There's another big dimension of the stagnation of wages and wage suppression, which is contracting and misclassification and gig workers, right? Yeah. And there are whole business models like our friends at Uber who have created lucrative, you know, business models based on contract workers as opposed to traditional employment where people had access to wages and benefits. Yeah. So in the next episode of Pitchfork economics, we are going to explore what I like to call our nation's largest price fixing scheme, the health care system. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L A R J media and the young Turks network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at civic action. Follow our writing on medium at civic skunk works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at pitchfork economics. And one more, you should definitely follow Nick on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always a big thank you to our guests and thanks to you for listening from our team at civic ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach silk, Jasmine Weaver, Justin Farrell, Stephanie, Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul constant, Steven Paulini and Annie Fabley. See you next week.