 Hi there, my name is Paul Constant. You have heard me here before on Pitchfork Economics. I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. And the way that I came to writing was through bookselling actually. I was a bookseller at Elliott Bay Book Company, which is the finest independent bookstore here in Seattle. And I was also a books editor at The Stranger. And I, in my spare time, run a site called the Seattle Review of Books. And really book reviews are sort of how I learn to interact with the world. And books are still obviously very important to me. And one of the things that I liked most about Civic Ventures when I started here was that everyone here reads all the time. One of the nicest things about my first interview for Civic Ventures was coming up to Nick's office, which is just like piled high with books everywhere. And they are obviously well-loved books. You can tell when you walk into someone's office if they actually read the books or if they're just there for decoration. And Nick's books are thumbed through and some of the spines are broken. And he can pick up and quote from the books to prove a point or to argue a point or whatever what have you. Books are a significant part of our interoffice conversation. And that works out real well for me. So I wanted to take a little time on the podcast to talk about books that we're talking about or books that have influenced our thinking and share them with you. If you're interested in pursuing a specific lane of thought, these might be additional sort of guideposts for your journey. So I wanted to talk first about Thomas Frank. He is one of the first writers who sounded the alarm against Donald Trump before the 2016 election. He published his book Listen Liberal or Whatever Happened to the Party of the People in the fall of 2016 before the election. That book is an argument that the Democratic Party has become controlled by wealthy, over-educated elites and that they've lost touch with the working class people who used to make the backbone of the Democratic base. When I was reading this book, I found that the critique stung a little bit, which I think is how you know that a critique is working. The Frank attacks a lot of ivory towers, sacred cows, and he argues that Democrats have gotten too friendly with the very people they should be aggressive against, particularly the tech industry and the financial industry, instead of sort of keeping executives at arm's length, we're actually making them part of our organizations and that is working out very badly for the people who we are supposed to be working for. So you might be rolling your eyes now because you've read exactly 300 New York Times glowing profiles of working class white Americans living in America. It's important to remember that Frank was there first and his argument is a lot more nuanced than just listening to some guy rant about immigration in a diner. He's a clear-eyed observer who loves democratic populism and he has a lot of ideas about how to make Democrats relevant again. I hope that this is required reading on the staff of every Democratic candidate for president this year. I know that political non-fiction books have a shelf life of relevance and I think that Listen Liberal will likely be completely archaic after the 2020 elections, at least I hope so, but I don't think there's been a better time to read the book right now while we are debating amongst ourselves how to make the Democratic Party's case to the American people. So I think that you could pick up a lot from Listen Liberal, Thomas Frank. He's a columnist at The Guardian. He's a sharp and incisive writer who isn't afraid to make some enemies and those are the kind of writers who I love most. As somebody who is a former independent bookseller, I would be remiss if I did not remind you to check out a local independent bookstore if you'd pick up your copy of Listen Liberal, which you can find at indiebound.com or of course you can check it out from your local library I'm sure. They have copies available for you. Thank you.