 Happy Friday, I'm Annie, I'm the policy researcher here at Civic Ventures and a producer of the show. On Tuesday's episode about reimagining capitalism, you probably heard Anu and Trevor mention the Finnish Civil War and the role that it might have played in the type of capitalism that Finland has today. Well, I thought that was a pretty good opportunity to dive into some pitchforks history, so I called up an expert. Hi, my name is Duamas Tepera and I'm a historian. I work as a lecturer in history at the University of Health and Get to Moment and I have been researching the Finnish Civil War and the commemoration of the war. Can you introduce a little bit of what the Finnish government structure was like leading up to the Civil War? Well, first of all, Finland was part of the Russian Empire, so it was a Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire until October Revolution. Finnish society was an anomaly in the Russian Empire because Russia was an autocratic society. But Finland had an autonomy, it had its own parliament since 1906 and there was a universal suffrage that included women, so it was very democratic. Now at the same time, Finland was a very divided, socially divided society. The class divisions were pretty high, Finnish industries were booming during the World War because Finland was left out of the war, so the Finnish men were not conscripted to the Russian armies. So the Finnish economy was booming until 1917 and now it created enormous wealth for some sections of the society, but it also meant that many of the class divisions were highlighted. Now, of course, Finland was at the same time a pretty rural nation at the time. The majority of the citizens lived in the countryside. The land ownership wasn't very equal, so the land wasn't distributed equally and there were very high class divisions in the countryside too and the state informers wanted to be able to purchase their own plots. That was one of the key issues leading up to the Civil War. So can you go into the class tensions a bit more? I was reading that they were aggravated by the economy from problems from being involved in World War I and from leaving Russia and that there was kind of a vacuum of institutions. The October Revolution, it created a vacuum of power in Finland and in Russia and this is very important because it showed the people that old institutions were not viable anymore and that was a major issue in revolutionizing socialists. They understood that following the steps of the Bolsheviks in Russia could lead into a socialist takeover in Finland too. So they seized the opportunity. One must understand that the police force, the military were very complicated issues. There was no military in Finland because it was the Russian military. People started to form own paramilitary groups, the white civil guards and the red guards. So people took the initiatives to themselves without state institutions. So there was a vacuum of power and there were high class divisions. Who was on either side of the class divisions? Like it was the reds and the whites, right? Can you describe who was on each side? Well, of course the reds were supported by working classes both in the cities and in the countryside. At least 70% of the population belonged to the so-called working classes. Now geographically, it's just the southern Finland where the socialists were in control. The whites or the middle classes consisted of farmers and the reds in middle classes meaning state officials and merchants and the basic professions. And of course there was this even thinner upper class industrialist, Aries Teprecy, who of course supported the cause of the whites. The whites controlled geographically all of the vast areas in the north and in the middle of Finland. So is it true that the whites formed in response to the reds, like increasing organizing and labor demands and strikes and they formed to protect their property? Yeah, that was very crucial in the beginning. And the labor dispute between the industrialists and the workers and the labor dispute between landowners or the farmers and farm laborers and tenant farmers. And of course you must remember that there was a very difficult situation with the food shortages in 1917 and during 1918, which of course sort of feed the disillusionment of the ordinary people. So was that the spark that was really the difference between what I kind of understand to be this year of mounting tensions and then there was a tipping point into the beginning of the civil war? Yeah, yeah. One could say so, well, war in itself was rather short, about three months. Started as a social revolution in the capital in Helsinki and in other towns and cities in southern Finland. The socialist, the reds, they took the initiative and for the first part of the war, the reds were pushing the whites back. But very quickly the whites were able to reorganize their troops and gave permission for German army to enter the conflict. Now the German, it was basically a very experienced professional army. They immediately wiped out the resistance in southern Finland. It took 11 days for the Germans to advance from their landing point in southwestern Finland to Helsinki. So it was a very quick operation and that was in April 1918. So it became very bloody, not because of the scale of the fight, but the lawless executions and makeshift court marshals after the conflict. And that was the period when the so-called white terror started in the spring of 1918. Casualty figure of the entire war is above 36,000 people, which means more than 1% of the Finnish population. That the Finnish population at the time was only 3.2 million people and 36,000 of them perished. It was largely people who were fighting for the reds who died, is that correct? Yeah, two-thirds of the casualties were reds. One-third of all of the casualties were killed in action. One-third in white and red terror. But white terror was much more plotier than red terror and one-third in the prison camps after the war. And the prison camps were the most deadliest places in Finland in the summer of 1918. Because there was the Spanish flu pandemia that affected these prisoners who were hungry at the same time and so about 12,000, even 13,000 people perished in these POW camps. I was wondering what the role of the Spanish flu was because I couldn't find it anywhere online. But I was like, it must have played. It was all over the world. Oh, yeah. Yeah. There were 80,000 people in these prison camps. And I think something like 12 or 13,000 of them perished within a couple of months. You can imagine that this bitterness, these prison camps created in the society after the war. And because these deaths, many of them could have been avoided by better hygiene, better nutrition. So the majority of these deaths were caused by ignorance by the whites. They just didn't care. How did it end? How did it end? Well, yeah, that's a good question. First of all, there were certain prominent dissenting voices within the ranks of the whites who gained some publicity, but they were mostly ignored. But very crucial was that the international media, especially in neighboring Sweden, to follow the disaster in Finland. And of course, the attention of an international media. That's when the Finnish officials, the white officials started to react. And very quickly, the majority of these red prisoners were freed before the end of the year 1918. And this is also a very important thing that you must understand that when the civil war was raging and during the terror phase of the war, there was no legal, legally binding trials or any criminal prosecution. People just were killed. But after the prison camps were established, although they were very deadly, legal institutions were recreated. They started to research, to prosecute and try these revolutionaries. But the majority of the reds were freed because they were deemed as just ordinary guardsmen who didn't have much influence in the war. And that was important. Another very important factor that created lots of controversy and bitterness was that all or basically all of the white perpetrators were able to walk away from the mass killings without any sentences. How did they overcome those divisions? Because they pretty much had to jump into working together to create a government. Yeah. Well, obviously, it wasn't the easy task. But at the same time, it was a success story of a kind. And to something that I have been researching a lot lately, and I'm still a bit puzzled. That's how it was possible to overcome these plates. And well, first of all, it is very amazing that there was very little political violence in Finland after the civil war in the 20s. I think one of the reasons is that there was a genuine endeavor to reinstate the legal society of the war. Then many of these reforms that had been crucial before the civil war that had not been implemented, like giving the tenant farmers the right to purchase their farms and stuff like that, they were very quickly implemented after the war. Now, there was a working day, the tenant farmer question was solved. And then one of the major issues had been the disparity between suffrage. There was universal suffrage in parliament election in Finland. But in the local city and rural council elections, the universal suffrage was not known. And the suffrage was still based on capital. So all the men, not even women, but only the men of capital and enough earnings were able to vote. So this problem was solved also immediately after the civil war. So looking at the history of the democratic socialism movement in Finland, do you think that the type of system that exists in Finland today could have happened without the civil war? Oh, yes, of course, it could have happened without the civil war. I think the civil war, in fact, slowed down the progress. So many of the Nordic welfare state innovations had been implemented in Sweden and in Denmark way before in Finland. But of course, the civil war had its influence, that's for sure. And after the civil war, very quickly it was established and understood that a small nation, a small society like Finland, it could not prosper without democratic institutions. And the majority of the whites were very pro-democracy too. And that's something that one must understand, that the opera class or the people with capital it was very thin in Finland. So they couldn't rule without the consent of the larger masses. How do Finns look back on the war today? Is it seen as a revolution or is it lumped in with Russian liberation? Is it seen as a class war? How is it viewed by history? Well, that's a very good question. Because there isn't a consensus in Finland on what the war is. There isn't even a consensus for the name of the war. So we don't even call it the civil war usually. Civil war is something that is used, but it's more of the, well, it's a sort of a social democratic name for the war, the civil war. Now, many of the younger generations and many of the researchers like me used a phrase that would be translated as domestic war or an internal war because it gives an impression of neutrality, whereas civil war is historically being seen as a social democratic name of the war. Now, the winners of the war, the whites, they never call it the civil war. They call it the war of liberation. They saw it as the war that liberated Finland from Russia. Now, of course, it was also problematic that at the event of Finnish independence, the nation started to fight themselves. Right. Because that was the first time that Finland was on its own, right? Because they were like, they were ruled by the Swedish empire before. It was sort of national narrative and nationalism. It was very problematic. Now, it was also one of the reasons that the war of liberation narrative gained popularity in the 1920s and 30s. And even today, there are many people who actually call it the war of liberation. But if one calls it the war of liberation today, it is usually a sign of rather conservative, even a right thing, political attitude. So those divisions still exist today? Symbolically, yes. But I mean, we don't really think of when I meet a new person, I don't really think that about his or her allegiance regarding the civil war. You know, we do in the US when we meet someone, we're like trying to figure out what their ideology is. Well, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, yeah, of course. But I don't think that the civil war is perhaps the point of reference in history. It's interesting. Why is it so? I mean, because the civil war is still a very popular historical event. I mean, not only in research and in academia, but in fiction and in popular culture. Today, I think the hegemonic view of the civil war is tragedy, and it's tragedy for the both sides. And it isn't required as very clever to narrate the civil war by taking either a right or right point of view. But one is expected to emphasize with both sides and problematize the conflict. And it's allegiances and stuff like that. So I think it's a tragedy today. And that's interesting because in a way it has been able to, because the civil war has always been very problematic for the sort of official state narrative of Finland. It was very difficult to commemorate. It has not been commemorated since the end of World War Two until I'm talking about the state commemoration or the official commemoration until two years ago when there was this centenary of the civil war. And it was time when the state sort of had to react and state commemorations. And it was about tragedy, mutual tragedy. I want to finish up by asking you something that we ask everyone, which is, why do you do the work that you do? Why do you study the Finnish Civil War? When I started studying history, I wasn't interested in war at all. And I couldn't imagine myself doing military history or anything that is connected with war studies. But I was very interested about Finnish nationalism and how the Finnish society had been constructive. And then I started to understand the war, World War Two and the Civil War, form very key elements in Finnish collective identities and commemorations. So I couldn't avoid researching them. And I'm really interested about collective memories of the wars. Well, thank you so much for your time. I appreciate it so much. You're welcome. Okay. Bye. Thank you. Bye. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always, from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.