 Hey, it's David Goldstein. We've got a lot of content from interviews we've been conducting over the previous year. This one is, I think, is particularly important. On episode 13, we talked about monopoly and monopsony, and nobody has covered market concentration longer and in more depth than Barry Lin, the director of the Open Market Institute. He is the author of Cornered, the New Monopoly Capitalism and the Economics of Destruction. We talked to him not just about the dangers of monopoly and monopsony, but what some of the policy solutions might be. Actually a lot of stuff has happened since we last talked. I want to give you an opportunity to talk about what you want to talk about, but I thought maybe we'd start with your reaction to Senator Warren's proposals on antitrust and regulating the big tech firms. We were thrilled. We were completely thrilled by that proposal. We've had a conversation going with the senator for a number of years now. The senator, as you may recollect, she gave a terrifically important, probably the most important speech about anti-monopoly since the 1930s back three years ago, 2016. Her speech in 2016 really put America's monopoly problem on the map in a way that it had not been before. This speech or this presentation, this set of policy proposals that she put out a couple of weeks ago, was building atop that. It's very specifically focused obviously on the tech platforms. It cut straight to the heart of the problem, which is both the structure and size of these corporations and then the behavior of the parts of them that are monopolies. What we see inside of this set of proposals is the actual fixes that will get us to where we want to go in the United States. Some of these proposals use antitrust law in the traditional sense in terms of, say, splitting up Facebook, separating WhatsApp and Instagram from Facebook. Others use regulation. Could you explain more specifically what Senator Warren proposed? She proposes a restructuring of these corporations, both putting a limit on their size, sort of saying any corporation of a certain size will be treated differently, either broken up or, as you said, regulated, and then also putting restrictions on their structure and corporations that are of vital importance that provide a vital intermediary role the way Facebook does in communications, the way Google does in various forms of communications in search, the way Amazon does in various forms of commerce. If you've achieved a sort of dominant position as an intermediary between people who are selling or thinking something or writing something and the people who are buying it or reading it, then you're going to be treated differently than you are now. That's what she's really talking about here is various forms of common carriage regulation, which you can achieve. You can achieve it in a variety of ways. Some of them are actually, you can pull it out of the antitrust toolbox, but sometimes in the past we've used sort of top-down regulatory systems. There's a whole number of ways you can achieve common carriage, but the fact that she's putting these solutions out there that are going straight to the structure and to the behavior of these super giants is really transformative of the debate. Just take a moment to define that term common carriage and why it would apply to a company like Amazon. A common carrier, the concept of common carrier in the United States, this is what we applied to the railroads beginning at the state level in the middle of the 19th century, at the federal level beginning in 1887. We applied common carriage to the telephone companies and the telegraph companies. We applied that to the electrical utility corporations, to pipelines, to the airlines, to the broadcast corporations in various respects. We applied common carriage to the telecommunications firms in 2015 when Tom Wheeler announced the net neutrality decision. Net neutrality was a common carrier approach to the carriage of information on the lines that are controlled by AT&T and Verizon, for instance. In that case, just to be clear, net neutrality means that these broadband providers cannot discriminate the content that's going through their broadband. Yes, and that's the essence of common carriage is that you cannot discriminate. You have a vital monopoly. In these cases, all of the instances I just mentioned, these are monopoly networks. But even before the monopoly network, we applied common carriage to ferryboats. We applied common carriage to stagecoaches. We applied common carriage to inns. And actually, you can trace this back to Roman times. You can trace common carriage back to Babylonian times. This is a very, very old form of regulation that says if you control a monopoly, you have to treat everybody the same. You can't pick and choose who you carry. It's exactly what you said. It's nondiscrimination. And these kind of rules, it plays out in a couple of ways. Everyone gets the exact same terms of service, and everyone gets the same price for that service. Right. So in the case of Amazon, Amazon's marketplace is the dominant place for other companies to sell their goods. This would prevent Amazon from directly competing in the marketplace with its own Amazon basic products. That's actually an important secondary. What you're getting at is an important secondary action to reinforce the neutrality of these sort of essential middleman monopolies. And what you're talking about there is vertical integration. And this again goes back to well into the 19th century at the federal level. It goes, actually, I've traced it back into the 16th century in English law, where if you're a trading company, you can't engage in manufacturing. If you're a transportation company, you can't engage in trading or manufacturing. If you're a bank, you can't compete with the people who depend on you for banking services and for credit. And like you're talking about with Amazon, it's like right now Amazon routinely, it's part of their business model. They study what the people who depend on them to get to market, they study their businesses. If they like the business that someone's engaging in, they'll just replicate that person's business up to the point of just stealing it, completely displacing the original business person with an Amazon branded Amazon owned business. They do this in publishing. They do this in toys. They do this in electronics. They do it in sector after sector after sector. In any previous era of American history, that would have been absolutely and completely illegal. It's not really that much different from what Standard Oil did. Yes, Standard Oil, and actually, that's an interesting thing. That's a great example because people's, John D. Rockefeller, some people say, oh, he was more efficient and that's why he became, he was able to build Standard Oil up to be so large. But actually, what John D. Rockefeller did is he leveraged control over the railroads. He basically captured because he owned so much of the product that was being transported on the Pennsylvania Railroad. He also provided the Pennsylvania Railroad with all of these lubricants that they needed to keep their engines running. He leveraged his ability to control the Pennsylvania Railroad into blocking all of his competitors off the railroad. He used the railroad to serve as his wall around his corporation. That's actually the same thing that happened with Carnegie Steel. Andrew Carnegie learned how to leverage the power of the railroad against the other steel corporations and block them from market and become the dominant steel maker. It wasn't because he was doing anything better. It wasn't because he had a better product. It wasn't because he was more efficient. He actually just figured out how to leverage the railroad before his competitors did. At that point, the laws preventing this kind of discrimination were not so clear that he was unable to do so. How exciting is this for you after all these years to see these issues suddenly come to the forefront of a presidential campaign? It is exciting in a certain way. For us, it just means more work. We already had a lot of work, and now we just... It's like, oh, that's great, but it means that we've got to do this document, we've got to do this document, we have to run this event. There's actually now a lot of time to think about it. There's this opportunity. We just see there's this amazing opportunity this year. In the two years before the next administration is taking office and really beginning to fill its positions, we have two years in which to really ensure that as that next administration is taking office, they are doing so with a traditional American anti-monopoly pro-democracy philosophy in their minds. When they think about what to do about big tech, and also about the economy in general, because this is not only a problem with big tech. We see monopolization across the whole United States political economy, and this is a problem in... As you know, it's a problem in hospitals and food and farming. We just see this is an incredible opportunity to actually get at the heart of all of these problems that affect just about every single American in multiple bad ways. I want to go off on a tangent. I don't know if you've given any thought to this. If you have any comments on the current scandal over the Boeing 737 MAX, the fact that you had really the only commercial jetliner maker in the US certifying itself, its own planes, how much of that is just run of the mill regulatory capture, and how much of that is a result of Boeing's monopoly power? It's probably about 99% a product of Boeing's monopoly power. There's two parts of that story. There's the fact that it's regulating itself, that it's captured control over the regulation process, that it's captured control over the White House. We saw the CEO of Boeing in the midst of all this call up Donald Trump and say, President Trump, can you help us, protect us against these complaints by the Ethiopian government and the Indonesian government about the flaws in our product, which is really an outrageous thing. There's another side to this, which is the fact that when you only have a single buyer in a manufacturing system, in major airline or construction, at this point, we have Boeing and we have Airbus. Just earlier this year, within the last year, we saw Boeing essentially take control over Embraer, which makes smaller airliners down in Brazil. We saw Airbus essentially take over Bombardier, which makes smaller airliners in Canada. We went from two major companies and two smaller companies to just two corporations. One of the results of that kind of consolidation in an industrial system is that the system itself becomes more subject to failure. You don't have the competition you need to improve the products. In fact, you end up with a degradation of the quality of products. You have degradation of the quality of systems. You have degradation of the systems for innovation, up to the point of just the ceasing of innovation. Digital monopoly, some people say, oh, it's more efficient. We only have to have one manufacturing line and that means there's no waste. No, actually, when you only have one manufacturing line, what you have is fantastic waste and you have a slow and then more rapid breaking down of the system so you actually don't end up having products and services that you need as a society, as individuals. This is a huge, hugely important issue at a time when we in our society, we're trying to figure out how to continue to be able to move around the world in trains and planes and automobiles. What we're seeing, however, is because we're not policing monopoly, we're seeing the monopolists, the capitalists, the system come in and break these systems of manufacturing, of innovation down. We're drawing these systems so that we do not have the tools we need to make cleaner airplanes, make cleaner trains, make cleaner cars for the future. Right, because if Boeing and Airbus don't want to do it, it doesn't get done. It doesn't get done and they just say, hey, sorry, we're busy. You know, I've always found it a little funny that the same folks who rail against the inefficiency of collectivization and nationalization, having a state owned industry, seem to have no problem with the monopolization that comes out of market forces. What we're seeing here is exactly that. There's those folks who are railing against state takeover, against state control. One way to actually restate what you just spoke about is they're promoting what they promote is S-statism. They promote private states, because what we see with Boeing, what we see with Amazon and Google, these are private states that have absolute control over certain manufacturing, over certain flows of information, over the delivery of certain types of entertainment. It's a type of control that we have never, ever allowed any previous organization and certainly not the government to have. It's almost, we're almost back to the mercantilist era where you had these state chartered monopolies. Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, they're like the new East India Company. Yeah, they're like the East India Company, but with the ability to read your email and track where you drive and track where you walk and track with whom you're speaking every day, every moment. Then they have a license to buy up all of the different databases, all the different information that's being captured about you from your bank by other applications. What we see here, it's the British East India Company plus the KGB. Instead of a tea party, what we need is a data party. We need to go and grab our data and dump it into the harbor and protest. That's exactly it. The thing is that the data, because the thing is it's our data. That information that Google, for instance, they have all this vast cache of information about us as individuals, but also us as a public. They want to keep that private. They want to control the doors to that data. They want to say, we're going to decide what gets commercialized off this data and who gets to commercialize it. Lo and behold, it's going to be mainly us. If we had WhatsApp and Instagram competing with each other and with Facebook instead of both being owned by Facebook, maybe they might compete with Facebook over how to better protect your privacy. Yeah, and that's a good start. One of the things that, going back to the discussion of common carriage, people haven't necessarily understood what common carriage really was. Common carriage was the first privacy legislation. What is it saying to the middleman? It's saying to the middleman, well, you don't actually get to use all this information that you know, you've gathered about the business of the people who depend on you to get to market because you know where they're shipping from, you know what they're shipping, you know how they're shipping it, you know in what quantities they're shipping it. That's all information that you can use to control them and manipulate them, especially vis-a-vis their competitors. But you know what, because you have to carry everything at the exact same price on the same terms on a first come, first served basis, that takes all the value out of having that information. So that's why common carriage is our first privacy legislation. And so people are now trying to create new privacy legislation. We actually have most of the tools we need in common carriage law. It's becoming more and more clear that we're going to win this fight. You know, it's like we see the number of people who are willing to stand up and point their fingers in public at Google and at Facebook and at Amazon grows by the day. The awareness that we have to do something about these powers grows by the day. And you know, the conversation has really shifted already from well, should we do this? Could we do this? Do we have the right, do we have the power to do this? The conversation really now is how are we going to do this? What are the particular ways in which we are going to rein in Google, Facebook and Amazon? That doesn't mean the end of search. It doesn't mean the end of having like one button buying of things and having them delivered to your house, it doesn't mean that you're not going to be able to sort of create a system of communications that combines your ability to talk to grandma with your ability to talk to your grandson like in Facebook. We're going to have all of that the day after we fix Google, Facebook and Amazon. It's just that the system at that point is going to be safe and it's going to be serving us. It's a novel idea that these companies should be serving us instead of a handful of shareholders. Well, thanks for your time, Barry. Hey, great to talk to you. Thanks. Bye bye. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L-A-R-J Media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. And one more, you should definitely follow Nick on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always, a big thank you to our guests and thanks to you for listening from our team at Civic Ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach Silk, Jasmine Weaver, Jessen Farrell, Stephanie Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul Constant, Steven Paulini and Annie Fabley. See you next week.