 Hey there, this is Nick Hanauer and you've reached the magic voicemail box where you can leave me a question for my Ask Me Anything episode. All you have to do is state your name, where you're calling from and your question. In the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. One American capitalist take on how we got into this mess and how we can get out. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, senior fellow at Civic Ventures. Hello Goldie, we get to answer some questions from listeners today which is always really fun. It's just interesting to hear from folks what interests them. We know it interests us but that's obviously- It's actually one of the downsides of podcasting. Back in the day when I did talk radio- People could call in and yell at you. Yeah, that was low and then I got to yell back because I could press the button and cut them off and continue talking. But it was engaging. A synchronous is less, you get a lot less feedback in a lot of ways. It's not quite the same thing where we get to have a conversation with our listeners but we certainly enjoy hearing from them. A, it's nice to know that people are listening. And B, it's nice to know that they're listening so carefully that they have such interesting questions. It teaches us a lot about where stuff that we think, it feels like we've explained well where we clearly haven't, where it's too complicated or where we just are- The explanations that we have offered have not been complete or satisfactory. Right. We know this so well because we keep talking about- We lose track of the fact that we're using codes that other people might not get. Correct. And that's bad narrative. It is. That's bad form. So, anyway, it should be fun to answer these questions. Hey guys, this is Steve calling from New Jersey. I have a question that I am super surprised has not come up, at least on the first call and ask questions episode. What do you call and how you consider your economic philosophy? If I'm trying to find more information in general about the types of schools of thought that you're espousing, what's it called? I mean, it's not communism, it's not socialism, it's not pure capitalism, it's not neoliberalism. What is it? And then, where do I go if I want to learn more about it from a scholastic point of view? It seems like everything you're saying is directly against Economics 101. So, clearly taking an Economics 101 class doesn't seem like a good idea. Where does one go if they want to learn more from a scholastic point of view of what you guys are talking about? Thanks for everything and keep up the good work. Good question there, Steve, from New Jersey. We're not socialists. We are not socialists. And I know personally, I'm not a capitalist. I know you're a capitalist in terms of that's what your job is. But what we're talking about is not capitalism as it is traditionally understood. And we do have a secret new phrase that we'll be debuting hopefully next year. There's a book on its way. And that will be the ultimate authority. That's right. So, Eric Beinacher and I, along with a massive amount of help from Goldie and somebody who works for Eric too, are working hard on a new book on economics where we will offer a new phrase to describe the thing between capitalism and socialism that we think we should dedicate ourselves to. But in broader terms, there's a whole ton of stuff that listeners can read to get themselves up the sort of learning curve. But there is the beginnings of an alternative curriculum, isn't there? Right. So if you don't want to take your traditional Econ 101 course, there is an alternative curriculum that is available online at core-econ.org. It's a complete beginning economics course. You can step yourself through it. It's also available free to instructors and to universities to use in the classroom. And it really gets to a lot of the science that is informing our work, informs this work. Sam Bowles, who's been on the podcast. This was one of his big projects. In addition to that, one fun thing you could do is watch my latest TED Talk called The Dirty Secret of Capitalism and a New Way Forward. And then click the footnotes tab and there's a big reading list of books that we think lay a lot of these ideas out, starting with my co-author, Eric Beinhacher's book, The Origin of Wealth, Evolution, Complexity, and the Radical Remaking of Economics. Taking together all of those things should help. So Steve from New Jersey, thank you for your question. And of course, you want to look for our book coming next year. In the next 12 months, we hope. Hey, my name is Sarah Schwab. I am from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and I have a question for you. I'll try to articulate this as best as I can. I love your podcast. I love the work that you're doing. But it often sounds to me like there's an underlying assumption in your sort of new economic model that is what I'm going to call the fixed pie. Meaning in order for more people to have more, the people at the top have to have less. And I'm wondering if that's intentional. I obviously that makes a ton of sense, but I'm wondering if there's another option, another way of looking at it where the people toward the bottom can grow and can grow faster than those at the top without anyone necessarily having to lose in sort of a growing pie model. So again, I'm not an economic scholar. Just wanted to throw that out there. And thanks again for all that you do. So Sarah Schwab from Milwaukee, that is a fantastic question. This tension between growing the pie and splitting the existing pie up differently is a super important one for you to tease out. And it's really worth addressing sort of in detail that question. So the first thing I think we have to acknowledge is that there are really two dimensions within which the economy can grow. The one is the economy in aggregate, which is the whole pie. And when we think about economic growth, I know most people think of it in terms of money, but in fact, what we really mean when we think about economic growth is, are we improving the material circumstances of the majority of people? And the truth is that the rate at which we improve the material circumstances of most people is inextricably intertwined with how many people actually get to contribute to improving the material circumstances of all people, both as consumers, satisfying their personal wants and needs, and also as creators of solutions to human problems, which is the thing that improves the material circumstances of all people. So the way I would summarize this, Sarah, is that the pie actually grows faster when the portions are distributed more evenly. Correct. That the unequal way we are distributing the pie now, that the gross inequality that we're seeing in our economy is actually slowing down the growth of the entire pie. That's right. And if we include more people in the benefits of the economy, as Nick said, as innovators, entrepreneurs, workers, and as robust consumers, that pie will grow faster. Correct. Now, we're not talking about splitting it up exactly evenly. That never works. There's always people that are going to excel that are going to produce more, that just circumstance, they're going to end up with more. But there's this balance. At some point, there's too much inequality, and we're at that point right now, which is hurting growth. And so in a very real way in our economy, if we want to maximize the rate at which the pie grows, and secure our democracy, by the way, which is a separate thing, we have to find a way to ensure that everyone is fairly compensated, not just very rich people. And the immense wealth that we are seeing in our society is a product of a bunch of rules and norms and laws and circumstances that enable a few people to make a lot while other people don't. So for instance, if Jeff Bezos, who's apparently worth $100 billion today, was required to pay his workers enough to get by without government assistance, without food stamps, to live in dignity. Oh, hell, just to have a dignified middle class life. That's right. Like the workers he used to 40 years ago doing similar work. Exactly. Then he would still be very, very rich, but instead of $100 billion, he might have $10 billion. That's otherwise across the economy. And if all of the workers in those Amazon warehouses or all the McDonald's workers or all the Walmart workers were paid enough to lead stable, dignified middle class lives, they would be both more productive as people, as employees, but also would have the capacity to buy more stuff, which both increases the velocity of the economy, the size of it, but more particularly, it also increases the range of possibilities in the economy because the more disposable income people have, the more possibilities are created for businesses to meet that demand. And so these two things are linked, really more than linked, inextricably intertwined. So we want to reduce the inequality in the society to increase the size of the pie, not decrease it. It is a positive sum game. That's right. And you get more gain the more equal it is. Yeah, to a point. To a point. Exactly. Right. But from where we're starting right now- We have a long ways to go. Yeah. Before we've made it too equal. Yeah. Hi, this is Tim Connor from Portland, Oregon. I'd like to hear you talk a bit about the housing crisis because of course the new liberal solution is always to deregulate and encourage a lot of developers to do whatever they want as far as building more housing. But what I've noticed in Portland and I suspect you're seeing it in Seattle and I've met Francisco and other cities is what happens is that developers just build more expensive housing and that just drives prices up and increases homelessness even more. So what have you got to say about that? Thanks. Tim from Portland with questions about the housing affordability crisis in America. Yikers, that is a very complicated subject and something that we here at Civic Ventures are devoting a ton of thinking to. There is no quick answer to your question but we're going to in a few minutes try and detail what's causing the crisis and the kinds of things we need to collectively do to make it better. So, I think that your observation is not incorrect that if you leave this problem entirely to the market, the market will do a great job of dramatically reducing the price of luxury housing because that is what they're naturally going to build first because that is where the largest margins are. And since the constraint is the amount of land available in cities like Portland and Seattle you're going to try to get as much profit out of each piece of land as you can get. That is capitalism. That said, we do need to loosen land use rules in certainly in Seattle, maybe Portland's done a better job of it because in Seattle where we have 65% of the land here zoned as single family detached housing that really puts a crimp in your ability to deal with the explosive growth we have and so we have a shortage of supplies. So we need more density in city. We need to build taller. We need duplexes and triplexes. We need multifamily housing and we're going to have to change land use rules. You agree with that? Yeah, but it's actually more complicated than that because one of the things that we have to just acknowledge in all of our fast growing cities is the inexorable urbanization of planet earth. That in a technological economy in order to participate effectively in that economy you basically need to be part of that network which means you need to live in the cities which is why these cities are growing so fast which is putting huge amounts of pressure on the housing stock. Again, part of the housing affordability crisis is the wage suppression crisis over the last 40 years. Part of the hellscape that neoliberalism has created is a circumstance where for most citizens their wages have been stagnant for a really long time while housing prices and rents have gone up dramatically. One of the ways in which we'll have to address the housing affordability crisis is by raising wages. If you raise wages, housing... These things get much more affordable. As long as you're building more supply otherwise you're just bidding up the existing housing. So there is the affluent will be taken care of by the market. Low income households, there's going to have to be some sort of government subsidy on either the construction side of it or the capital side or on the rent side and then we get to one of the thorniest issues which is that missing middle which the market is also not addressing in cities like Portland and Seattle. And there I think Nick in our office we have come to the conclusion that we need whatever you want to call it, a public option on housing. We need the government to build and maintain large amounts of rental housing outside of the market. And this is the approach that all of the cities on earth who have successfully addressed this problem at scale have adopted. Places like Vienna, Singapore and the idea is incredibly simple but it is sadly expensive and it takes a long time which is to build high quality middle class housing in great locations and then simply maintain the price of those rentals at cost not rising with the market. And just know listeners that we're going to devote an entire episode of Pitchfork Economics to the housing affordability crisis in the nation. So to sum it up you need multiple solutions happening at once. We do need smart land use regulations so we can build more density where we need it. That's number one. We need to focus on raising wages because part of the affordability crisis is what you earn and we need to focus on creating a lot more supply in cities like Portland and Seattle where there's been a lot of growth because no matter how much you raise wages if you're not keeping up with supply you're just going to bid up the existing housing. Yeah no matter how good your policies are. And some of that supply that's going to have to come from the government. Hi this is Andrew from New Jersey. Given the recent law passed in California do you think Uber might support the idea of portable benefits? If so would you work with Uber in trying to pass legislation establishing a portable benefit system? Thanks. Good question Andrew. So Nick would you work with Uber on portable benefits? Well in the interest of full transparency we are working with Uber on portable benefits and in fact Dara the CEO of Uber, David Rolfe a local labor leader and I signed a joint letter of agreement in principle a year and a half ago to explore in the state of Washington a policy framework that would bring portable benefits to workers in our state and one of our team members Jess and Farrell who at that time was in the state legislature helped craft the beginnings of that legislation. So we are trying to do something here in our state to address these issues you know again in the interest of full disclosure it is complicated and it will take a while. So I bet you they're even more motivated today to try to figure something out than they were. But while Travis Kalanick who I didn't know but who by all accounts was basically a sociopath didn't care about workers and portable benefits the existing CEO would probably want to do something reasonable. Would rather negotiate it himself rather than having it forced upon him by democratic legislatures. Exactly but they should have moved quicker shouldn't they? Yeah so I may be a little more skeptical of working with Uber but if they're willing to come to the table and work out something that maybe leads the entire market towards portable benefits for everybody then that would be a net plus. Yeah thank you for your question. Hey Nick my name is Brad from Michigan. I have an interesting question for you. I know one of your favorite topics is the minimum wage. Well I just saw a meme on Facebook the most reliable of places to get economic information. It had an interesting idea. It says what if we pegged minimum wage to the cost of living specifically housing of that particular city or even county. So it says something like 2% of the cost of housing and then that would end up being you know they said something like San Francisco was like $41 or something. I was just curious about what you would think about something like that. I'm skeptical but I'd like to hear your thoughts. Thanks so much Nick. So Brad from Michigan that's a really interesting question about the minimum wage and pegging it to various things. I'm going to extract from your question the principle I think you're suggesting that the minimum wage should be tied to local costs. Cost of living. Cost of living. That is a possibility and not a terrible idea but not one I personally am in favor of because I think that one of the worst parts about our national economy is the divergence in prosperity between urban places and rural places small places and big places. And I think that if you peg the minimum wage to cost of living which you effectively do is reinforce these dynamics. The regional inequality. Regional inequality that you make places that are poor and cheap continue to be poor and cheap because you haven't impacted the wages at all. Another approach and the one that I subscribe to is to impose wage standards including the minimum wage not by region but by company size because a Walmart even in the smallest poorest town in America can afford to pay $20 an hour for a worker and give them health care and everything else. And I think that that's a far better way to organize the economy. But with this one caveat and that is that I think an even more interesting thing to peg the minimum wage to in addition to standardizing it around company size is to peg the minimum wage to the wages of the top 1%. This is a policy formulation that I've wanted to outline for a long time. I think it's a really cool idea which is to basically connect the minimum wage to the maximum wage so that everyone in the country rises and falls together. So if those hedge fund dudes want to pay themselves a couple of billion dollars a year well fine but that means that the minimum wage will rise essentially in concert. And I think that that will have a really interesting effect on the economy both at the high end and at the bottom as people begin to grapple with the fact that the real benefits of the economy are going to be more equally shared. I think it would be a super interesting and fun thing to do. Yeah I'll take a simpler approach to this. My only reason why I would support tying minimum wage to something like local cost of living would be to avoid a lowest common denominator problem that we can't raise the minimum wage high enough in Seattle because then it would be too high in Alabama. You don't want to do that. So certainly there are places like Seattle that can afford a much higher minimum wage. But again I'm with you in worrying about reinforcing the existing economic inequality between regions. I think that's bad for this country. Large corporations can afford to recycle money through some of the poorer part of the country by paying them a higher wage relative to lower costs than they do elsewhere. That's right. And just think about how great it would be for those small places. It would be amazing. So Nick not all of our questions have come in by voicemail. Some of them were emails. It's a shame we don't have anybody to read them. Oh wait look who's sitting across from the table from us. It's Annie. Hey guys. So Annie here podcast producer and policy researcher here at Civic Ventures and Goldie you are right for once. Not all of our questions come through voicemails. A lot of them come through to my email inbox and I want to pass one along to you right now. It's from Spencer Quinn. He says hey guys living in South Florida and seeing the economic disparity between the top 1 percent of the world who play here and the bottom 1 percent who live here and serve them makes me want to be part of the solution in some way. How can I get involved. What can I donate money to. So Spencer from South Florida that's a great question about how to be involved and how to make a difference. What I think is the most impactful is to be part of or helpful to worker organizations that are trying to increase standards. And I'm sad to say I actually don't know anything about the civic landscape in Florida but there is somebody out there who's trying to among other things raise the minimum wage in Florida to reform the labor standards that allow Florida businesses to exploit workers. And I guarantee you those folks are under resourced. And I would love to see you help with some of those folks. Well one of our theories in the office is that political money can actually be much more. You get a much better return sometimes than on charitable money. You can put money into a food bank which is great helps people who are who are food insecure or you could put money into a ballot initiative that would raise the minimum wage and that does a lot more for a lot more people. And so we're very enthusiastic about helping with those things. And in fact in our political practice at civic ventures we stand up a lot of ballot initiatives and do that work often. Spencer another theory in our office is that the way you make big change is by changing narrative. And I'll just raise a pet peeve of mine which is the woeful state of modern journalism which makes it much harder for us to get our narrative out because A most of the media is corporate controlled and B there just aren't that many of them left. So if you've got your favorite not for profit media outlet I know I give to ProPublica every year. Listen to your podcasts when one of your favorite podcasts economic podcast is asking for a little money. Give them a little money. Find the places where you find the best information and support them and that will go a long way towards helping us change hearts and minds on about how the economy works. Thank you listeners for all those really cool interesting questions. Like I said before it's always really interesting to hear what people are thinking about or what they're confused by or what they want more information about. And it's it's also fascinating over the course of the year Nick because it's been it's been a year. It has been a year now. This podcast how much the conversation is changing. You can hear it in the questions. There's still still a bit of that neoclassical influence in some of the questions but you can really feel that people are trying to get beyond that and wrap their minds around what the new economic thinking is teaching. Yeah. And for sure in the political discourse that's taking place in the Democratic primary anyway we have come far boy the you know the center of gravity around the policy agenda has changed so much since 2016. It's really it's really super gratifying. So who knows Nick maybe after another year of this podcast maybe the pitchforks won't come after all. Maybe you'll be lucky. We'll see. And if you do have questions please call our number and leave a message 731-388-933-9. That's 731-388-9334. Also we take episode suggestions. So if you've got a killer idea for an episode lay it on us and maybe we'll do it. An economic topic a question an author that we might not be aware of send it our way. And if you don't want to leave a voicemail there's contact information on our website pitchforkeconomics.com and maybe we'll have Andy read it for you. In the next episode of Pitchfork Economics we're going to talk to our friends John Arnold and Preeti Krishtal about the egregious prices Americans pay for pharmaceuticals and why and how that industry is so screwed up. It'll be a really interesting episode. I hope you'll listen. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.