 Working people spend their lives doing what they are supposed to do and not getting rewarded that should be at the center of our political conversation. You know the real job creation is the smallest, right? You know that's been the engine for generations. And by holding the largest employers to the highest standard we tilt the economic playing field back towards smaller companies and mid-sized companies and make it easier for them to compete and grow. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. It's like Econ 101 without all the BS. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. So Nick, one of the things which we have the freedom to do in this office, which I love, is examine issues, examine problems, and then say, hey let's come up with a brand new idea on how to deal with it. For better or worse, we do do that. We do do that and worst thing that happens is it's no good, but sometimes we hit on something which seems like a good idea. And last December you wrote a piece for Democracy Journal on an idea we call progressive labor standards. That's right. Explain a little bit what's the problem we're trying to address and what progressive labor standards actually are. Okay, progressive labor standards is a framework for implementing any kind of labor standard. Could be minimum wage, vacation time, paid sick leave, whatever. Whatever it is, but just imagine the minimum wage because that's quite simple. And rather than implementing that policy by geography. Or just everybody pays the same minimum wage. We would implement it based, but tiered, imagine a three-tier system based on the size of the company. And progressive labor standards is an acknowledgement that the topography of the economy actually isn't geography. It's based on the size of the enterprises in the geography. And the market power that they have. Exactly. The idea came out of a bunch of interactions that I had when we sort of challenged ourselves in the office to send me out into the community to talk to ordinary people about economic policy because it's really easy to persuade yourself in a small office like ours or frankly talking to this sort of elite policy makers and politicians that we surround ourselves with that your ideas are smart and they make sense to people and people should just do what you wanted to do. And we said we should really just go out and tell people about these things and get their perspective and feedback. And so I went out and talked to a whole bunch of groups, rotary clubs and things like that about economic policy. And out of that experience emerged some new ideas. And one of the things that was really striking about talking, for instance, to small business people about political economy issues is that they were mostly very supportive of the idea that people should be paid enough to get by without things. But they wanted to pay their workers. They absolutely wanted to. Most of them. Most of them. But in general, these are good people who want the best for their community and frankly the best for their workers. But they are constrained by the dynamics of the market. And the more you talk to them, the more you realize that they think that higher labor standards, for instance, is the enemy of small business. When in fact the enemy of small business is big business. And the exploitive practices that the biggest businesses in America now employ. Those discussions got us thinking and doing research. And we learned a bunch of things through that research, didn't we? We learned, for instance, that in non-urban areas, in rural areas, most people actually don't work for small businesses. They work for giant companies. Right, because there's so much less economic diversity in these rural areas and small towns that a larger percentage of the population is working for giant companies than in a city like Seattle, which has giant companies. Exactly. Exactly. And in fact, if you go to a small town, it's not some independent department store. It's Walmart. Right. And it's not an independent gas station. It's Exxon. And it's not a local bank. It's Bank of America. And it's not a local burger joint. It's McDonald's or Burger King or whatever it is. Those are the big employers. And those companies employ the most exploitive labor practices and have effectively driven all the small businesses out of business and driven down wages. Right, through their monopsony power. That's right. They drive down wages. And the studies that show that when Walmart moves into a county, wages fall in retail and fall even further in the grocery segment. That's right. And the other thing our research showed was that, you know, this divide between urban and rural, you know, but the political, cultural economic divide is largely driven by differentials in economic growth rates. And the fact that basically all the action is in the cities, by the way, whether you're in California, where it's all L.A. and San Francisco, or even if you're in a smaller state like Idaho, which is very, very quickly urbanizing. Right. We're even in a red, relatively rural state. They're now having this challenge of the urban rural divide. And so we were like, man, this is really, really important. And the other thing, of course, that has gone wrong with the American economy is monopoly power, monopsony power. The country's economy is now dominated by fewer and fewer giant companies. And that monopsony and monopoly power is bad for workers. It's bad for politics. It's bad for everything. Right. And so essentially, to sum this up, we have three different types of inequalities that are growing at the same time in this country. There's the inequality that we always hear about, which is that income inequality between individuals that the very rich, like you are doing really well and everybody else, not so much. There is what you were explaining, this inequality between businesses, that it's increasingly difficult for small businesses to increase with these giant, large, national, multinational companies. Correct. And it's actually leading to a decline in small business formation and dramatic decline. Right. And there's a third one inequality, which is really undermining our political cohesion, our social and political cohesion in this country. And that is this growing with the experts call spatial inequality, this geographic inequality between regions, between red parts of the states and the blue cities, between the blue states and the red states, where there are this handful, maybe a dozen or so urban centers that are doing really, really well, mostly on the coasts and everybody else, not so much. And partially it's because Seattle, we're growing a lot because of Amazon. Amazon's been a curse, but also a blessing to this city. For sure. But Amazon is sucking wealth out of the rest of the country. Correct. Every small business they put out of business, every sale that they're now taking there, a little portion of that is coming back to headquarters here in the city. Correct. Which is helping to pay the high wages at Amazon headquarters. But we are economically colonizing much of the rest of the nation in the same way that Walmart did. Yeah, absolutely. There's another addendum I'd like to add, which is that there's now in the press a ton of conversation about monopolies. Amazon is a monopoly. Facebook is a monopoly. All these big companies being challenged. And there's, I think, an appropriate amount of conversation about legitimate conversation, serious conversation about breaking those companies up. And I think in many cases we should do that. But progressive labor standards suggests a way to attack this problem, not from the top, but from the bottom, which is to effectively tilt the economic playing field back towards smaller companies. Right. Back towards small businesses, back towards workers, and back towards rural communities and small towns. Exactly. And, you know, again, another thing that we found in our research, which frankly is both troubling and somewhat surprising, is we used to do all this. Right. Thirty or forty years ago, many of these safeguards were in place that, in fact, we taxed giant chains more than local stores. Progressive taxes on chain stores. That's right. Many states had them. Yes. In many states, large chains were required to pay their workers more than local chains. Right. And this was not anti-competitive. It was pro-competitive. It was designed. We had laws that prevented companies from selling things below cost. Yes. So as to drive their competitors out of business. Yeah. So in some progressive labor standards are kind of like the progressive income tax, in that our biggest and wealthiest corporations, those who can afford to be held to higher standards, are held to higher standards on things like the minimum wage and the overtime threshold. Yeah. But you know what, Nick? What do we know about how things work in the rest of the country? Almost nothing. That's right. Therefore, we called up Boise Mayor Dave Beater to tell us what it's like to run a city in Red State, Idaho, and to try to pitch him the particulars of this proposal. My name is Dave Beater, and I'm the mayor of the city of Boise, Idaho. We'd like to start by talking about Boise, if you can tell us a little bit about Boise, its economy, and what you see its greatest challenges are. Well, I'm a little partial, as you'd expect. I'm a Boise native. My mother was also from Boise. Boise is blessed geographically. We're at the end of the desert, where it starts up into the mountains. We're about a hundred and, well, we're 153 years old. Originally, we were not a mining town, but we provided the goods and services for the miners, which is actually a better gig than mining. Yeah, Seattle did that. Exactly. The mining itself is really tough. Exactly. That's where the mining is. The mining itself is tough, but the suppliers do pretty well. For the state capital, obviously, Boise State University is home here, and that's grown steadily. We historically had many headquarters of corporations. Albertsons was founded here, Micron Technology. Over the years, we've diversified our economy, become HP also has a division in Boise. Increasingly, we have a lot of tech startups and a lot of tech activity. That's been quite good to us, but a pretty diversified economy that helps us sustain in downturns. And now, we have great outdoors, a pretty mild climate, an increasingly diverse population, and, well, a lot of good press nationally and otherwise. But our real challenges are because of that, we have pretty intense growth going on right now, and how we deal with that, especially in a state that's red, besides our little part of the world. That's our biggest challenge. Public transportation without a funding source, wages that don't keep up with housing, and affordable housing challenges without a lot of tools to deal with that. So that's kind of where we are right now. If we do the right things in the next five to ten years, we can avoid some of the real, you know, those dynamics of too high a cost of housing, you know, instead a livable, you know, socio-exonomically diverse city. We've got some ideas that we want to pitch to you. We thought we get the input of a medium-sized city. I don't know where, how, yeah, medium-sized city mayor, you've been there a long time. You're also familiar with the politics and economics throughout the rest of Idaho, which is fair to characterize as a red state. Oh, you bet. A lot of it is very rural. And so, Nick, you cooked up this idea of what we call in the office progressive labor standards. You know, we often think of imposing labor standards by geography. And certainly we have done that around the country. We did it in Washington state. We have a 15, actually, now it's a $16 minimum wage in the city of Seattle, but 13.50 statewide to account for a lower cost of living, et cetera. But having been through that fight for, well, I should say, longer than anyone else has, because the whole fight started here, a group of us have begun to come to terms with the notion that we may have made a mistake in implementing these things by geography, because the true topography of the economy has nothing to do with geography. It has to do with the size of the companies that are in the geography. And so, progressive labor standards is a very simple idea, which is to hold the biggest companies to the highest standards. So, the largest companies, for example, would be held to a 15 or even a higher minimum wage, $18 an hour, $20 an hour, and medium-sized companies to a $15 minimum wage. And maybe the very, very smallest companies would be held to an even lower minimum wage. Or some sliding scale, I don't know what it is, because the truth is, Walmart and McDonald's and Citigroup and Wells Fargo and HP can easily afford to pay people $20 an hour. How do we know? We can simply look at their P&L statements, right? It's very easy to see that these companies could easily afford to pay their workers enough to get by without food stamps, in fact, to pay their workers enough to lead stable, secure and dignified lives. And by holding the largest employers to the highest standard, we tilt the economic playing field back towards smaller companies and mid-sized companies and make it easier for them to compete and grow. And what could imagine, particularly in a state like Idaho, doing something like this, because even in the smallest town in Idaho, the Walmart can afford to pay $20, right? They can. And if they did, and if all those people working for Walmart were paid that, well, those people would have enough money to spend on the small businesses in the town that they lived in, and that would be good for everybody. We're beginning to socialize this idea as a way to account both for geographic inequality, which we have a big challenge around in this country. Even in Idaho, a relatively rural state, you have that same challenge, right? There's way more affluence in Boise than there is in the smaller areas of Idaho, and that's creating a divide even in a place like Idaho. What's kind of a misnomer is that we're a rural state. Increasingly, we're an urban state. Because agriculture needs fewer workers that the urban centers around the state are growing. All of them are growing all around the state. Even a state like Idaho, the urban dynamics are really important. Right. A lot more jobs in processing potatoes than in growing them. Yes. Exactly right. That's a great example. Chobani has their largest facility in the world in Idaho. Yeah, but as we look at the population of Idaho, you've got about 700,000 people in the Boise metro, and there's only 1.7 million. That's half the people in Idaho. Right. That's a bigger concentration than the Seattle metro compared to that. Yeah, and one of the things that we wanted to chat with you about, and you can just get your perspective on, is this urban-rural divide is a terrible problem in American politics and culture today. From our point of view, one of the biggest parts of it is the prosperity divide that is very hard to be economically secure and prosperous in these smaller places as urbanization unfolds at the rate in which it's currently unfolding. This progressive labor standards idea, I guess, was part of our hope in beginning to socialize, is to get more prosperity flowing in those non-urban areas where those big companies that tend to dominate the economies of these tiny towns, actually, we ensure that they make people affluent, not affluent, but at least stable and secure. You're onto something important in that, boy, I don't want to go too far in the weeds, but the number, I didn't know this until recently, but there's a group called the Kauffman Foundation, and they are the best entrepreneurial new business nonprofit in the country, and they got us onto the fact that for decades, the number of new businesses started in America was relatively consistent. There were swings in the economy, but the number of new businesses started remained pretty constant until the downturn. There's this notion that people took more risk after they were downsized and lost their jobs in the downturn, and it's just not true. We haven't seen both locally here and across the country, the number of new businesses started has not kept up, which makes the bigger companies even stronger. They got more political influence, and the real job creation is the small business. That's been churning out jobs in America because a chunk of those small businesses become big. That's been the engine for generations. From a policy standpoint, it's really tough, but to favor those companies compared to the legacy corporations that have even more influence is the right policy to do. How that works out into it is tough, but we're onto that and doing whatever we can locally to try to help that because that engine of new business and jobs is not cranking like it used to. We all have an interest in seeing that happen. One of the interesting things that happened for us as we began to explore this issue was that we discovered that this is actually what we used to do in this country. Yes. That in fact, we used to tilt the economic playing field towards smaller businesses. We taxed chain stores higher than we taxed local businesses. We used to do all these things in America to make it easier to be a local business or a small business than a giant multinational corporation. Over 30 or 40 years, we just forgot all of those lessons and all of those rules and structures were pushed aside to enable a few giant corporations to get ever bigger. Obviously, there are some people in America who benefited a hell of a lot from that. They were one of them. Yes, maybe. Somebody crossed the table for me. But everybody else didn't. Yeah. That's where we went wrong, basically. Well, that's what this Kauffman group points out. I mean, they're capitalists to their toes. Yeah. And entrepreneurial, I mean, it's anti-capitalist in a sense. It really is because of newer ideas and the real engine of innovation and job creation is that the smaller company level. And we're mean, like I said, they pointed that out that it hasn't come back since the downturn. And then it gets worse because and this is their work. The legacy corporations have even more authority. It sounds good in a way because we have prosperity and we have growth. But underneath it is this real concern that we're just not generating these jobs and new companies that eventually lead to bigger companies and out a little ways. We're in trouble. So, I mean, you're on to it. Can I ask you a political question? Sure. You are a, I think it's officially a nonpartisan position, but you're a Democrat, right? Self-described Democrat. I am. I was in the legislature before I ran for mayor. Okay. So you are a Democrat in a blue city, slightly blue city, bluish tinged city in a deep red state. You know, I know how strong that urban-rural divide is both politically and culturally. Any chance of persuading folks outside of Boise that this sort of progressive labor standards approach might be good for them and good for the rest of the state? Well, the definition of an optimist is being a Democrat in the state of Idaho. So, of course there's a chance. Of course there's a chance to convince them. And I need to live a nice, long life so I can see that happen. But I do believe that is starting, we're starting to see the beginnings of that. That's great. You know, people understanding why do I keep voting for those people that don't understand my life, that don't support policies that help me? You got to think these dynamics will change. By 60%, we voted for Medicaid expansion initiative in the state of Idaho, 60%. But then they voted for the people that wouldn't do that through the legislature. Right. Right. And so we've got a hope, and I do have hope, that eventually they'll see how the disconnect there. And that makes me think, well, you know, it's coming back around where people, well, that disconnect will become apparent. You know, I'm not going to say we're going to be blue, you know, real soon, but then we get competitive. Then we can start to win some and make the arguments that people start to listen to and get traction. We've got one final question for you. I'd like to ask all our guests, why do you do what you do? Oh, because I love it. I get to wake up every day and try to make my hometown a better city. And they pay me for that. That's really good fortune. So short of playing fullback for the Green Bay Packers, it's the best job I could ever imagine. It's just like me, Nick. I wake up every day and you pay me to... Yeah, insult me. I do mean that. It doesn't mean it's not a pain in the... It's not a pain for a chunk of the time, especially campaign time, but that's a good fortune. Yeah. And the thing about being a mayor of Boise is you probably have a longer career than a fullback for the Green Bay Packers. Yeah, a lot longer. Doesn't take near as well, but it is longevity part of it. Well, it was a pleasure talking with you. Thanks for joining us. Yeah, thank you so much. Likewise. It was great. Yeah, thank you. And you guys too, keep at it. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. So it was interesting, Nick, that Mayor Beater had been talking about data he got from the Kauffman Foundation, which we actually cite in our progressive labor standards piece talking about the startup rate, which by the way is at a 40-year low, according to the Kauffman Foundation. Drawing from U.S. Census data, the percentage of new businesses that are less than a year old, this percentage of all the businesses in the country, is actually 44% lower than it was in the pre-trickle-down era. Right. And the Brookings Institute actually confirms that there are more businesses dying each year than are being created. Yeah, and this is the inevitable consequence of unfettered, you know, basically an unfettered economic system leading to increasing levels of corporate concentration. Right, but it's also, it's actually really bad for the economy. Republicans always talk about small businesses as being the job creators and the source of all this innovation, and historically that's true. So if you have less small business creation in this country, you're getting less innovation, and you're getting less job creation, and that means lower wages and worse products and services that you otherwise would have. And that market concentration, I mean, when you look at it, it's just, it's amazing when you actually look at the numbers. And we all know this intuitively, but when you look at the numbers in multiple product categories, today 74% of e-books are sold by Amazon, 75% of candy is sold by Hershey or Mars, 86% of basketball shoes are sold by Nike, in retail 69% of the office supply market is controlled by two companies, Office Depot and Staples, 90% of home improvement is Lowe's or Home Depot, and an astounding 99% of the drugstore market is now dominated by just three companies, CVS, Walgreens and Rite Aid, and I know you and I were kind of old, but I remember when there were local, locally owned pharmacies on the corner, not just giant chain stores. That's right, and the fact that we don't have that stuff anymore is an artifact of just forgetting about the value of small and medium sized firms. And this problem is even more acute in non-urban areas, right, where it has become increasingly, essentially impossible to open up a small business in one of these markets because they are so dominated by these giant players. Right, there's no way they can compete with a giant buyer like Walmart. Yeah, exactly, and so in the interest of efficiency or theoretically lower prices, we have eviscerated the most important parts of our economy, which frankly was small and medium sized business. So we're essentially allowing the big capitalists to monopolize capitalism, and that can't be good for the country. So we talked to Mayor Beater, he seemed to think a lot of these ideas would be a good idea for Boise and for Idaho in general, but of course he's in this red state where it's tough to get things through that legislator. What do you say at the national level? Where do you think the chances are we could get movement on this idea there? You know, I do think that progressive labor standards should be a harmonizing principle for Democrats and for people who care about a more inclusive economy. And I think that if Democrats win in 2020, I think that this idea is something that we may be able to get traction around. There are people who understand the lay of land better than me, including our next guest, E.J. Dionne, who is one of the most insightful commentators on politics and culture in America, and we're excited to have him on and to talk about this more. My name is E.J. Dionne. I write a column for the Washington Post. I teach at Georgetown and Harvard and at the Brookings Institution. I am a fan of Nick Hanauer and all that he does, so I am very happy to be here and David too. And I have a book coming out in February. The update is the day after the Iowa caucuses, and the book is called Code Red, How Progressives and Moderates Can Unite to Save Our Country. We wanted to talk about progressive labor standards with you, which is this very simple idea we've had to impose labor standards, not by geography, but essentially by company size, holding the largest institutions to the highest standards. But what we wanted to do was try to contextualize our conversation with you, because you have been both a witness, an observer, and a commentator on these changing dynamics for—and I don't want to pin you down—but for a very long time. You've been at this for a long time, haven't you? Well, it's nice of you to say that. I guess that means I'm getting old. But these issues have engaged me for pretty much all my adult life. I mean, going all the way back to a doctoral dissertation I wrote on the Labor Party and the Democratic Party from the 50s to the 80s on how we ended up with Thatcher and Reagan and what role the working class politics played in that. So yes, these have been issues that have concerned me. And I also say I grew up in an old union factory town called Fall River, Massachusetts, which has sort of been on the wrong end of the economy a lot, even since the Great Depression. And I always like to say that probably 80 percent of what I believe comes from growing up in Fall River and feeling that working people who spend their lives doing what they are supposed to do and not getting rewarded, that should be at the center of our political conversation. Let's just start the conversation, and you can agree or disagree with my observation, which is that in my lifetime, this is the first political cycle where the basic consensus from the Democrats running for president is that we should really actually do something about some of these problems. I'd say it's the first election in my adult life where the Democratic Party seems to be shifting left. Yeah. Do you agree with that? Yeah, I argue in my book that what we are seeing is the death of the Reagan economic consensus, which really dominated politics from Reagan's election to 2008. After the great crash, Reaganite economic ideas came under scrutiny, under question. But even President Obama felt he needed to operate to some degree within that consensus. And I think that progressives and moderates alike should celebrate the successes about the Clinton and Obama years, and there were some real successes, but also acknowledge that they left some problems unsolved because they were so constrained by this consensus. And I think starting in 2016, and definitely now, you are seeing people throw off the shackles of that consensus. And again, if I can just go back to healthcare, think about how different this debate is already from the debate that we had over Obamacare. President Obama was said to be a socialist because he wanted subsidies for private health insurance, you know, with a little, with some beefed up Medicaid. There was nothing radical about President Obama's healthcare plan. Now, the range of debate is essentially between Medicare for all and Pete Buttigieg's Medicare for all who want it. Joe Biden's healthcare plan is far more progressive than the original Obama plan was. And I think that shows that there is much more room here. Similarly, the demand for free college, which, by the way, isn't as radical as it looked. If you go back 40 years, state universities were very close to free for a lot of people. And wherever we end up there, you know, it goes from free college to President Obama's proposals for two-year free community college. Wherever you end up, there is a consensus that both college and other forms of post-secondary training so people can get decent jobs should be vastly expanded. And then to go to your proposal, there are many, many more people now talking about worker rights and regulatory actions that would help workers than were doing so four, eight, 12 years ago. We know where the American people are. What about D.C.? I mean, is it possible to actually enact any of this reforms given the, you know, the structure of the U.S. Senate? Maybe the Democrats win the White House and the House. And maybe, maybe, maybe in 2020, we win the Senate. But it doesn't look like we can hold the Senate for a generation or more, given the partisan divide in the country. Can anything liberal, progressive, constructive actually get done in D.C. anymore? I'm glad you raised the Senate, which is the least – I think this is an accurate statement. If anybody out there wants to challenge it, please let me know because I want to hear the argument. But I think the United States Senate is the least Democratic, small d, Democratic elected body in any democracy in the world. The ratio between the smallest state and the biggest state is over 70 to 1 in population. By the way, when the republic was founded, the ratio between the smallest and biggest state was 13 to 1. Wow. By 2040, 70% of us will live in 15 states, which means 70% of us will have 30 senators out of 100. If you look at bill after bill, especially when the filibuster is on, bills that pass with votes from senators representing 60% or more of the American population fail. Guns is a good example. Gun reform is a good example of that. The problem is the Constitution makes it exceedingly difficult, virtually impossible to change the United States Senate, which would be at the top of my list of reforms. And it's very unlikely you could get a constitutional amendment through because the smaller states would have enough clout to block it. So this is a huge problem. This points to two things. One is there have been talk of splitting states. There has been talk of letting some other entities have representation who don't. Certainly D.C. should have it, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands. That would equalize things a little bit. But I think that for the time being, given this very undemocratic structure, progressives have to try to figure out how to gain a foothold again in some of the smaller, more rural states. It's worth noting that the two Dakotas not so long ago had four Democratic senators. Now they have four Republican senators so that I don't see any way around, we've got to live with this very undemocratic body for a while. And so I think progressives really need to think about policies that lift up rural areas in small towns and to challenge conservatives and Republicans right at their base because the Senate is an enormous problem for those who are looking for progress and change. Right. So that was one of the inspirations for our progressive labor standards proposal, which was to address this growing spatial inequality between thriving cities like Seattle and much of rural America and addressing some of the very real problems in the agricultural sector where there's this huge monopsony power that is driving farmers into bankruptcy because they really only have one or two buyers for their hogs. Or their chickens or their wheat, their corn, etc. But you know that is addressing an economic problem. Is it possible to create today another farm labor alliance purely on economic issues when the cultural divide seems to be so stark that people are willing to vote against their own economic issues and well, for whatever their personal reasons are, whether it's racism or anger or fear. Do you see any hope in addressing that divide? I think a lot of people have lost faith over time in government's capacity to succeed. And some of that's the result of right wing propaganda. But some of that is a sense of particular government failure. So I actually think we're forming government and persuading Americans that yes, actually, not only does it have a sense of tile, but also as part of this than they realize, but actually progressives are committed to making it work much better than it has in the past. And then the third thought I will offer you will certainly agree with, because I'm going to read directly from the Democracy Journal piece about your idea. And this is one of my favorite sentences in your piece, where you're talking about progressive labor standards that really hit bigger companies harder, that put regulations up there. Your sentence reads, by harmonizing the interests of workers with the interests of small business and farmers, progressive labor standards enable Democrats to build a majoritarian coalition strong enough to combat the dangerously growing political power of our nation's largest monopolist. And I really like this idea of reestablishing links with small business. My own feeling, and I think you guys agree with this, is that you rarely get reform in America without support from some part of the business community. And when the business community unites as one unit against something, they have a lot of power to stop things. But when progressives find support from pieces of the business community, and by the way, there are a lot of business people out there who would rather pay their people more, who actually do care about their employees. And if they do care about their employees too much, they're worried at their competitive pressures who put them out of business. So let's favor high-end businesses that seek to succeed on the basis of helping their workers. And in your proposal, let's make sure that these regulations start with bigger businesses. Anyway, I just appreciated that sentence very much, because when we think about policy ideas, we can't just think this is good policy. We also have to think of the politics that underlies the policy and allows it to succeed. You know, one of the things that we have to remind small business people is that the enemy of small businesses and higher labor standards or government regulation, the enemy of small businesses, big business, and the exploitive practices and the scale advantages, you know, and all of that that has made it almost impossible. If you're a small shopkeeper, your enemy is Walmart and Amazon. Not the minimum wage. Yeah, exactly. We really enjoyed talking to you. I know our time is up, but we want to ask you one last question, which we do with all of our guests. Why do you do this work? I grew up in a very political household where we talked about, and it was actually in many ways a conservative household, but I had parents who were very, very engaged in community work of various kinds. My mom was a teacher and a librarian. My dad was a dentist who actually started a free dental clinic in our town in the 1930s, and I have sort of been animated by a series of political impulses, but also I think democracy and engagement is actually fun. I enjoyed politics from the time I was small, and I have loved, you know, I've been teaching now for almost 20 years, and I find engaging students not only exciting, but they teach me new things every day. So I feel very, very blessed in what I'm able to do. Well, EJ, thank you so much for spending some time with us. We're really looking forward to your next book. Yeah. Bless you. Thank you. Okay. Talk soon. Take care. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. I'll tell you what I really love about this more than anything is that it's a great narrative for actually educating people about the core problems, because, you know, we hear about all this stuff about inequality, and we think of it in this narrow sense as poor people versus rich people, but in fact, there's inequality throughout the economy and all of these rich and nuanced ways that are not just pulling people down, but also pulling the economy down with it. Yeah. And so the labor standards is one of those things that we're litigating. It teaches people about the problems that we face in, I think, really useful and constructive ways. And just talking to people about it teaches them, I think, about where the economy has gone wrong and how we could work together to fix it in constructive ways. And, you know, like we didn't talk about this that much, but I love the politics of this idea because what it allows progressives and Democrats to do is drive a wedge between the biggest companies in America and the other 99.5% of them. Right. Right. The farmers and small businesses and self-employed. Exactly. Yes. Because, you know, the enemy of small business and medium-sized business isn't labor standards or regulation. The enemy of small and medium-sized businesses is big business and their exploitive practices. And the way in which we have tilted the economic playing field towards big business and away from small business. And I think that's bad in all sorts of ways for the economy, for the culture and for the democracy. And this is a way to begin to push stuff in a better direction. And by crafting a policy that is designed to both level the playing field for small businesses and level the playing field for rural areas and small communities, it's an opportunity to help rebuild that farmer labor alliance that used to be part of the New Deal majority. That's right. What really excites me about progressive labor standards is to imagine that you implemented a $20 minimum wage for the largest companies in America. And just close your eyes for a second and imagine for a moment what would happen to all of the small towns in America that are dominated by these huge companies, Walmart and Bank of America and Exxon and McDonald's and so on and so forth. Is it instantaneously the next day that median wage in these places would double? At least more than double in most of these places. Triple. Well, yeah, I mean, $7.25 an hour. But you know, whether you're making $7.25, but going $7.25 to $20 is huge. Unbelievable. And what would that do for the local economies? Exactly. And for the small businesses that of course would also have to raise their wages, but would where everyone in town would now have so much more money to spend. And here's the thing. Of course, McDonald's and Walmart and Exxon and Bank of America would squeal and squawk and say that they're all going to go bankrupt, which is always a lie. They would pay and all of a sudden these these communities would be vital and economically secure and stable. And here's the even better news. Let's say Walmart says, well, OK, fine, we're going to leave. Great, great. I mean, definitely short term inconvenience to have the Walmart leave. But here's the beautiful thing. Now there's space for a small, you know, for somebody to open up a competing store to have that small or medium sized business once again in this in this small town. And to be clear, Walmart is not the only way to achieve the efficiencies that you get from economies of scale. There's a long history of cooperative grocery stores, which are pooling, they're buying and distribution towers. There's others way to do it. Maybe it takes little government assistance to get this built back up again. But it doesn't mean we're sacrificing low prices just because maybe there aren't as many Walmarts. Right. Absolutely. Or because the Walton family loses a little of their stock value and dividends. Yeah, there's all sorts of ways to skin a cat. And we could have a very different kind of economy with, you know, where where prosperity was more fully distributed, both up and down the economy, but also geographically to be a good thing. The way it used to be. Yes, correct. A little bit. That makes us conservative. Yeah, maybe reactionary. Reactionary. Yeah. That's right. OK, we're just a couple of reactionaries here. We talked to a lot of left leaning economists on this show. But next week for a change of pace, we've reached out to the University of Chicago and we'll be talking to economist Luigi Zingales about the Democrats economic platform. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on media at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.