 Hi there, this is Paul Constant. I'm a writer at Civic Ventures and a host on Pitchfork Economics. I run a current events book club at a bookstore here in Seattle called Third Place Books Seward Park. We've been meeting for almost three years now. Our first meeting was the first Wednesday of December after Donald Trump was elected and we've met every month since. The first book that we did was a book that I did not enjoy at all. It was Hillbilly Elegy, which became a bestseller after Trump won the presidency. That sort of had the trappings of a red state tell all and that was why people in blue states and cities were interested in it. But it turned out to be sort of a conservative bootstrap story disguised as a memoir and it maintained that there were good poor people and bad poor people and that poor people were poor because they chose to be, which is not true and also kind of frankly gross. But we read another book in our book club that turned out to be Hillbilly Elegy Done Right and it was Washington Post reporter Amy Goldstein's book, Janesville, An American Story. Janesville is a nonfiction book. It is set in former House Speaker Paul Ryan's hometown and it documents what happened to the locals of Janesville when the local GM plant, which provided most of the jobs for Janesville, closed its doors forever. So Goldstein just meets former GM employees and just sort of follows them around as they either find new careers or consider moving away or struggle with addiction and she just reports on what they're doing and over the course of years. Janesville is kind of heartbreaking to read because these are people who thought they had their lives all figured out. Their fathers worked at the GM plant and they figured they were going to work at the GM plant until they retired and that their kids would probably work at the GM plant. And so when the rug is pulled out from them, it's a real crisis moment and it's a crisis that people like Paul Ryan and Democrats in Wisconsin weren't addressing properly. They weren't speaking to it. And this is a great book to read because it talks about true economic anxiety in America, not the false kind that we see on Fox News all the time, but really kitchen table economics. How are we going to be able to feed our kids in this town that has been economically ravaged by General Motors' choice to close up the plant? Janesville was important to me because it put a human face on the facts and figures that we see in the news and that we discuss on this podcast all the time. It takes the unemployment numbers and transforms them into names and stories with happy endings and sad endings. And it explains how the opioid addiction epidemic is directly tied to the economic issues that we discuss on Pitchfork Economics every week. I was especially moved by Goldstein's explanation of why retraining workers simply doesn't work. Retraining has become a political catchphrase that everyone, Democrat and Republican, rolls out every time there's a plant closure or something like that. But it's asking a lot of human being to uproot their life and pursue a new career when they're 56 years old and they only see themselves as having a good 10 years of their life left. So Janesville also addresses why so many of the policies that we put in place to help workers in the Rust Belt simply won't work in practice when they sound good in theory. So if you want to understand the human cost of the economics that we are talking about on this podcast, you can't do better than Janesville to start. It is one of the most moving political books I've read in the last three years and certainly one of the most informative. And again, this is to remind you that if you want to check out Janesville, I would encourage you to do so at your local independent bookstore, which you can find at indiebound.com or from your local library. Thanks for listening. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.