 I'm Paul Constant and I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. So we have a guest with us today who is, full disclosure, somebody I worked with for many years. His name is Charles Mendeide. He's a writer at The Stranger and also a filmmaker. And I'm very excited to have him here because when I first moved to Seattle about 20 years ago, I started picking up The Stranger and I would read Charles. And he was the first economics writer, I think, who I really started following and who helped me sort of learn about how these things work because he's very talented at connecting economics to real world issues. And so I've wanted to have him on for a long time. So I'm excited to have him here. Can you please give your name and your title? Well, I'm Charles Tundeire, I'm the associate at The Stranger and I teach at Cornish College and also I'm a director. I direct films and I've written films. I'm a filmmaker. I wanted to talk to you because you've been doing this for a relatively long time in the media. How long have you been writing about economic issues? My father was an economist and he worked with the IMF back in the late 1970s. And when I was a kid, he would show me things that were sort of like explain things that were happening in the economy at that time in Zimbabwe. He would receive this incredible document called the World Bank Estimates for Global Growth and I loved it. And it was a weird thing and he had his own bar, we live in the house and he had his own bar and he would sit there and tell me things about what stocks were doing and which stocks to pay attention to because he was working with the government at the time. He would say like, oh no, this stock, this stock is going to explode tomorrow. And I said, why? And he said, oh, because the government's giving this contract to this particular company and they're going to announce it tomorrow. He would tell me this and later on I realized that he never profited it from it. He just knew. I was like, you're usually in our age, you just say, oh, you know, you watched Wall Street. You see what happened to Martin Sheen. And he got in trouble for that sort of thing. That's right. That's right. But my dad was in that situation all the time and I began my long interest in the background of our lives, which I think is how money and wealth is distributed. And how long have you been writing about economics? It was first of all because I was interested in Marxism in my early 30s. But then I found Marxism inadequate for a lot of reasons. I understand the critique, but I found it incomplete. And so when my dad, weirdly enough, passed away, I found a lot of his papers and I started reading them. And then it's one of those things where it's sort of super edible. Once he's passed away, I finally decided I could become my dad. You know what I mean? Like, he's gone. And so I took on reading economics around. He passed away in 2010. And I just suddenly became—that moment I became interested not so much in Marxism, but I became interested in what my father was taught. I became interested in the other voices. They call them heterodox economics. So there's this orthodox economics, which I sort of read. And then I realized that there was this other branch called heterodox economics, which sort of challenged these common concepts about what drives an economy and so forth and so on. And I started writing a little more, I think a little more deeply about the subject. Yeah, but you've always been writing about economic power. And that's always been something that has been, I think, central to your work, I think is fair to say. Yeah, it's never escaped. And that's, you know, the one thing is it was always there in my life in a strange way. And so it wasn't hard for me to connect the ideas that were sort of taught in colleges and so on to something like watching Alien. Right. Right. And you know, it's like it's 1979. And I didn't see that film at that time because they wouldn't let me in. I was 14 years old. But if you watched Alien, it was really—and I saw it about three years later, but when you watched it, it was really about class conflict. Yeah, there were workers. There were workers on the spaceship. And they had problems with the contract. And there were issues of bonuses. If you watched this, you saw like, you know what I mean? It was really marvelous. And I thought, my gosh, Alien actually saves the crisis. I mean, Alien is not actually the enemy. The Alien is like, you think you have problems about pay wages? No, I'm coming in to eat you. And therefore, all of that is over. And nobody ever talks about, well, what about the bonus? After the Alien. So the Alien is protecting the employers. You know, you could ask. And I thought it was really curious that you can see the moment that something—I mean, the Alien is, of course, indifferent. My question was, was he watching? That wasn't really in Star Wars. And that wasn't, you know, there's a little bit of it in Blade Runner, but in Alien, it was—it stood out that, you know, that two characters in the film, one black, one white, were clearly working class. And they had gripes about their contract. And so I did—I grew up with that thing like, oh, so this is a big part of our lives. And that's what it sort of stems from, not from reading Marx, but watching Alien. Yeah. And you've incorporated that in your film criticism for as long as I've been reading you. Yes, that's—yes. And to me, it feels like a lot of the rest of the American mainstream media is catching up to you in terms of that. It's not so bizarre for me to go to a movie website and see someone talk about colonialism in the latest Thor movie, which was directed by an indigenous person. Right. And so do you think that the way that the media has covered economic issues has changed in the time since you've started? Absolutely. Do you know, I watched a movie—okay, I rewatched it. It was a John Houston film. I don't know why I want to say Sweet 16, but it's not. It's called Pretty in Pink. And I'm watching this film, and John Houston was like the last of the real Hollywood figures who just before—Hughs. Hughes. Hughes. Hughes. Hughes. Sorry. What was I saying? You were saying John Hughes, Pretty in Pink. Yeah, Hughes. John Hughes. I was mispronouncing his name. And I remember that's when Hughes had in his films a real class consciousness. It's hard to tell people like, are you kidding me? I said, no, actually watch Pretty in Pink. Right. It has, it's again, really structures the relationships around class. Yeah. People who have money, people who don't have money, and the way the poor people live and so on. But the weirdest thing ever, I was watching it. And the professor or the teacher in high school opens with a discussion about the New Deal and starts to talk about what happened and why the New Deal happened. And the kids are like fast asleep. And I was like, wow. You know what I mean? We're not. And this is a movie made in the 80s. In the 80s, right? Yeah. And you're like, no, we know this. What happened for us to lose, I mean, at that level of popular culture, to lose that, that was ironic that the kids thought this was unimportant. And you're watching it, and the teacher's saying the New Deal and so on and so on. When the New Deal, what the New Deal was, it made the working class into the middle class. And so you're watching this film about somebody who's sinking from the middle class, right, with somebody who's rising above the middle class, and both are trying to find a connection. You might say, I'm over reading it, but trust me, you just look at that. My question is, why did we have a class? What happened to our class consciousness in the USA? But it was not absent. It was there. And it was gone. And so anyway, it turned out to me there was a way to interpret the art world and films and so on and so on. But yeah. It seems like there's also been a class conscious, like there's been a reawakening of class in the media. Partly, I think there's been a fair amount of organizing in newsrooms around the country, BuzzFeed and Vox and locally, Crosscut has, you know, and does it feel to you like other people are catching up to you in terms of a position? Well, it's really sad right now because we still believe, for the most part, in the USA, that the bulk of us are in the middle class. And we've been told this for the most part. You can flip a hamburger. I'm sorry to say it's not wrong. I always hate that expression. But you know what I mean? You can flip it. Because that is a class loaded term. That's a class loaded term. You know what I mean? But I don't mean that in that sense. I mean, literally, you have to read that you're working. You can stack bricks. You can do all these other things. And so on and you can do it for something like $25,000 a year. If you're lucky, sometimes it's $18,000. And somebody who's earning $250,000 is considered to be in the same class as you are in the US. So the US doesn't have really a class structure. It has this massive idea of the middle class. And anybody can be a part of it. All that's required is that you show up for work and you're in the middle class. And that's the notion. And you have to challenge people about this. If you don't do that, then you don't explain a lot of things like homelessness and so forth and so on. For me, it became like, yes, I started doing this. And I started thinking about these problems. But that issue is like, first of all, the universal class does not really exist. There's still class sections. And they're also historically defined. But there's also something else that drove me nuts. OK, I want to tell you a story. I have to tell you a story. There was a thing when I went to Vancouver, B.C. I was just hanging out there writing something. And I was going down the streets downtown, Robeson and so on. And I noticed all the shops were closed. In fact, I was looking for a Hungarian restaurant where they sold schnitzel that I loved. A schnitzel. The best schnitzel ever done right. Seattle has no schnitzel joints. I was looking for this place. Where is this? Where's my schnitzel? And I realized that the place was gone. But it was all boarded up. The whole street was boarded up. And the first thing I thought was, oh, there's an economic catastrophe. I did not know Vancouver was in a recession. You know, they have a better, like, baby social services. So it doesn't hurt so bad or something like that. I did not know that. And I wrote to a friend there, an architectural critic. And I said, are you in a recession? Why is Granville and so much of Robeson boarded up? Oh, and he said, oh, nobody can afford to open stores there. And I said, well, isn't it better to have a person in the store, they're not there, when you make, you still make money? He says, no, no, no, no, you can't. And I said, what's what's happened? He says, all the spaces are owned by global capitalists. And they don't care about who goes into those businesses. And I realized I went to look at what's going on in economics in general. And I discovered, or at least I became aware of this thing where if you have a global capitalist system, the rich are from all over the world. And if you're in a city, right, and you have the rich people, at least the rich people are just in your neighborhood. Right. But if you suddenly open up your capital flows, they come from everywhere. And so they're always looking for investments and places to park money and stuff like that. And that launched me to a new direction in terms of looking at finance and what is finance and what does it do. And I found its effects disruptive universally. And so I got into that track of thinking. Yeah, you were one of the first people to turn my attention to that global investors buying real estate in Vancouver and just sitting on it, just leaving it empty and sitting on it. And I think that's one of the neighborhoods in Vancouver that were ghost towns, investment ghost towns, since real estate is an investment now. Was that story being covered in Vancouver? There was a lot of resistance to that particular reading of the situation in Vancouver. I had to investigate. What is it? You'd go onto the economics department for the province, right, the British Columbia province, and they would say, no, there's nothing going on. They constituted a small amount of investment in the market. The issue is not so much where the money came from. Money comes from all over the world. It can come from true China, but it also can come from South America, if you're in Miami. And it also comes from Africa. One of the biggest exporters of surplus cash is actually Africa. And I don't realize that, but what it is is that there's no investments in Africa that can match, say, an investment in Europe. So you actually move your money to America to make sure that it can increase. There's this whole thing that you just start to see, and you realize that, oh my gosh, yes, we are in trouble. I don't want to get into the details of it, but it's like, no, it's a really difficult thing to explain because it is complicated. Okay, you watch that movie, that wonderful movie. I thought it was really well done, actually, the one called The Big Short. If you read the book, I actually thought that they did a great job of capturing the essence of that book. Yeah, Lewis is a great explainer, and the movie did that as well. Did that so well. But still, it was really like they had to make leaps to explain these kinds of investment vehicles, how they work, because they're like, no, it's not about just me buying a product. It's about the person behind me who says, you're going to buy a product. And the person behind that person say, that person will buy a product. And everybody betting on the fact of this, and it becomes really broke. You may think, oh, okay, I don't have the bandwidth for this because it is. Yeah, and it's just like, no, that's what it is. And so you have to hesitate. Always carefully. I don't want to make you snore about this because, yes, it is crazy and it is complicated. But the essence is to say, like, okay, you say something like, quantitative easing, right? You come into quantitative easing. And you say to somebody, well, what is quantitative easing? You say, oh, well, the government's buying like bonds back from people and giving them cash and then giving them, what is a bond? What are the government bonds and the security? And you're like, oh, my God, you've lost everybody. But what you say is no, quite simply, you have to narrow it. The government is printing money in a fancy way. Right. You know what I mean? You have to come out with that. That's what's going on. They're printing cash and the cash is going to the rich. And I'm just sorry. That's what it is. That's what it comes down to. And so you always have to be careful when you explain this stuff because you know how the maze you're entering and there are others who will attack you when you write and say, like, oh, you don't know exactly, well, a CDO does this, this, and that. And I'm like, okay, okay, okay. I get it. I get it. At the end of the day, what is it you're doing? What is it you want? So you're distilling down the, distilling it down to an action, which is journalism. Yes. It's, you're explaining it using a metaphor that works and it's all metaphors are imperfect, but you can still get there. No, they have these things called CDOs, right? Collateral, like, gosh, I gotta remember all this stuff. Derivatives that are called CDOs. I'm just going to call them that. I'm sorry. I'm going to have to go and look it up, what CDOs means because I'm just not going to pop it up in my hand right now. But they're complicated and they were actually part of the big short, right? Yes. And you can go and read them and you can say like, oh, what it is is that it's an insurance policy. If I am paying off a debt, right, the insurance policy says if I stop paying off this debt, that it'll ensure that I still get my money from the debt. That's simple. It's like quite similar. Like if I buy a car and I stop paying for the car and somebody says, okay, somebody sold me an insurance policy that says, okay, I'm going to give you, we're going to pay you back because this person did not commit to the payment scheme. Now that sounds normal. No, it gets worse, right? It gets crazy. What is a CDO? What is a credit default swap, right? That's what they call a credit default swap. What is it that they're doing when you buy an insurance policy on the person paying a debt? No, it's not like insurance. If I buy health insurance, right? It's like, I'm hoping I don't get sick actually, right? I'm hoping I'll be well, humping around, right? That sort of stuff. And I'm buying it with the hope that it doesn't, I don't have to use it. A credit default swap, which are one of the, what the big investor calls the weapons of mass destruction in terms of finance. The big investor, the one who owns billions in dollars, what's his name? Oh, Beth Buffett. Warren Buffett, yeah. Warren Buffett called it. And if you look at what it says, right, what you do with the credit default swap is you say, I buy insurance on Paul Constant, his health insurance policy. I say, if Paul, I'm hoping I see Paul Constant crooks, right? Or at least get hit by a bus. Or something. And that's what, and I was like, what? This is what this thing is. You can buy insurance policies on somebody, somebody. Yeah, somebody's failing to make it a payment or to live. This is not an insurance policy. This is a bet. There's a bunch of chips you're placing. You know, the system was built on that. It's hard to tell people, it's really difficult to say this because you end up like, oh my God, it's crazy. It's crazy than you could ever imagine. One of the things I remember that you did that I thought was a really valuable public service was you had a series of, I guess I would call them book clubs, but I think you call them seminars on Capitol when Piketty's book came out. And I went to one or two and people were very receptive. And I think there were people who hadn't thought about this before. And you were very good at explaining it to them. Is what you're doing explaining things to people who have never thought about it before? When you're doing journalism, are you a teacher? Are you an explainer? Are you a storyteller? What are you thinking? I'm all of those. And I hope I am. I spent time reading Thomas Piketty's, the pronunciation is always kind of screwy, but a book, the Capitol of the 21st Century, and it was a long book. It was like a revolution in economics. And it was hard to tell people why it was so important that he had written this book. First of all, he came out of MIT. I don't want to get into the long stuff, but he came out of MIT and he had a mathematical background. And some of us who don't have mathematical backgrounds but knew that the system was like totally bizarre, could never say what he said with the confidence that he could say it. But he wrote this really excellent, and he only had a few formulas. All you need is basic algebra. Not this kind of fantastic, crazy stuff, but it was really important because his book became a bestseller. And a lot of people were not going to finish it. And it was important just to say, well, what does it mean that capital grows faster than normal wealth? That's the essential premise of that book was trying to explain that all this variations or all of its insights, all of its passages. It's a book that walks in to the same room in different directions. It can walk in through like the study of Jane Austen. It's beautiful, his discussion of Jane Austen and his discussion of Balzac. But he can also walk it through into the same point through, say, the protests that happened in South Africa where over 100 miners were slaughtered by policemen while they were protesting for high wages. In fact, he opened the book that way. But it was suddenly like, oh my goodness, here is this book and here is what it means. And we can finally talk. Us who have been outside standing on the sidelines because the profession became so mathematical. He was just this like, you know, Jesus walking on water. You just like, oh my God, thank you. And you could suddenly join him and say, OK, right. To me, that was really important. And it shook up the confidence that people had this kind of not the confidence, the certain the idea that people knew more than they did. And those people who did know more were actually in charge and so forth and so on. And therefore, whatever you felt about the economy, personally, those those instincts that you had such as like, oh, I'm being paid a little too much, a little too little, right? Right. I'm not being paid enough. You know, suddenly there was someone in the game with the credentials to say, yes, this is why you feel that way. And it's true. Yes, you're not. You're not in the state of denial. You really are underpaid and you really are in terms of what he sort of the way he read the situation. You really are worse off than you were 20 or 30 years ago. Yeah. And I think that's something that I think I started to realize when I was at one of your groups talking about the book and has become more evident over the years. But I think that Piketty really started or Piketty started the realization for me was that it's all the same money. You know, that the money that the point one percent has came from from the working class and the middle class and all that. And it's the same pool. It's not a different distinct. That was a foundational thing. That was a foundational discovery, I think. You know, I have to say one of the most startling things to me when I was reading that book and I remember just being you know, I read in the mornings, right. And I had to go out and have a cigarette because I couldn't. I was so stunned. You know what I mean? I walk out and I look at the dawn and I was like, this is stunning to me. What he said was that there was an idea that capitalism was making life better for everybody. Right. And he said that notion is actually quite recent. There wasn't that idea in the 19th century. Yeah. A lot of people don't understand that there was this. If you look at the poor in Europe and in England, there was dead. No sense of like progress. It was not available to them. There was you know, wages were terrible and they had to fight to end, you know, to cut down work hours. But there was no sense that it just gave you something that it made life better automatically. And what he said was that all of that came about after the middle class in the U.S. say the middle class in Europe and also in a sense the middle class in Japan in advanced capitalist societies. It came about because a catastrophic economic crash or a catastrophic economic experience, which is 1929 and the depression that followed. And two major world wars. And he said that that's when they were shaken. That's when the upper class was really, you know, we finally could say to hell with this. You are going to no more of this 19th century waiting for it, right? Waiting for the for the for the wealth to accumulate and then it's going to fall to us. Enough of that. And the middle class in the U.S.A. emerged from that. Yeah. It's hard to tell people that, no, you did not exist before World War Two. Just this does not there. And this is stunning. And I thought about it. I was like, holy moly. Right. You know what I mean? There were no suburbs. There were no suburbs. Yeah. We're dealing with boomers right now and they come from that generation. And it's hard to tell them that that was a new deal construction. It was a bunch of socialist policies in terms of home ownership and all this stuff that were kicked in in the 1930s and were and were settled by the 1950s. And it's hard. The numbers in the graph to make that apparent to me. I did not see them until I read that book. Yeah. And so it was a revolution in my thinking. When I was at the paper, I wrote about a lot of economic issues and I was probably not prepared to write about them mentally. I've learned a lot in the time since then. I learned as I was writing about them, which was a useful experience. Do you have any ideas about what a journalist's responsibility is as they write about the economy? No, no. You know, there's two institutions right now, two public institutions that define how we understand the economy. And one is academic and the other one is journalists or journalistic. And a lot of people don't understand what they don't get is that usually journalists will process the stuff that's coming out of the colleges, out of the universities, and they'll disseminate that information as, you know, in one way or another. And you're thinking that it's just a journalist just talking about a problem or trying to solve or trying to throw a light on a situation. But no, actually, and this comes from my Keynesian background because he's right, we're heavily influenced by research and studies that are done at universities and by think tanks and so forth and so on. I should say think tanks come into play as well. But if you are talking about something like, for example, you always get to somebody who will say something like, for example, today there was a big issue of the economy, the repo market is kind of in a funny situation. And they'll say this, they'll write, you know, right now, you know, there's a repo situation happening. The repurchase issue, what happened is the feds are now buying all this paper from banks because the repo market, I don't want to get into the repo market, it's nuts. People don't want to hear about it, but it affects your life. The fact is the government is buying up debt from banks so that they have enough cash. And you can come and guess what? Guess what you see in that little thing? Some will say, oh, well, why is there suddenly no cash in this banking sector? And they say, oh, because the government, you'll see this in newspaper after newspaper, Bloomsburg, New York Times, everywhere you'll see it and they'll say, oh, it's because. They won't even say they agree with it or not. They'll say, oh, the experts say that, right? Right. Yeah. They'll say the experts say, oh, it's because there's these capital requirements on banks and they have the cash, but they can't spend it. And so it's the government that's hindering them and they'll disseminate this and you'll read it in the Washington Post. I mean, you'll read it everywhere and nobody's saying, you know, nobody questions it. They'll just repeat it. They've regurgitate the experts. Regurgitate the experts. Yeah. Right. Who said this? Yeah. The repo markets. Yeah, the repo markets. I want to just, I just would love to explain this, but what it is is basically overnight lending and you'd wonder like they didn't have cash for a short time. Isn't that alarming? And they say, no, well, just because of this. And where did that come from? It came from some guy in the universities. Some a couple of researchers wrote a paper and showed a capital requirement. Who knows what capital requirements are? Who knows this? Yeah. It takes forever to know this, right? Yeah. And it gets down to the journalist and then you're like, oh yeah, yeah, the banks don't have enough money because their cash is tied up because the government imposes rules on them and so forth and so on. And that's what you read. Yeah. That's what you read. You read. And it sounds like it's like the answer to a lot of people because, you know, because this whole institutional framework between journalists and academics sounds solid. Right. Right. But nobody, and I've been surprised. I've been looking at this development and I finally thought nobody's questioned this issue of capital requirements. Capital requirements just simply means that a bank needs enough money in case, you know, trouble comes along. Yeah. Right. They have to pay. Like we live in a world with no problems. Oh, so you want to get rid of capital. You don't want to, you have to, you don't need money because, you know, day by day nothing happens. Yeah. Yeah. You know what I mean? You need a little cash on the side just in case. And this is all they're saying, but they don't say it that way. They bring up all these fancy words, capital requirements. Everybody goes to sleep and nobody knows that this was going. And it's a job of journalism to me. The job of me as a journalist is to attack and say, don't be gassed by these kinds of descriptions. It's the job of journalism to break down what is being said and present it to the public so that they have information that is actually, you know, that they can understand and they can use. Because all I'm saying is as a journalist is that I have the time to read this stuff. I have the time to go and call the professor. I have to, you know, that's what I'm doing. And I'm going to give you and you have to trust me the information that you can, it's actually usable, actionable information. But what you're seeing right now when you say like, oh, governments are not in the way of banking investments and so on or banking liquidity. Oh my gosh. And you don't understand it. That's ruined your life. That kind of thinking is going to make your life worse. Yeah. What's going to happen, Charles? I mean, like personally, I feel a little better about the way that economic issues have been covered. Maybe that's because we're, you know, in a generation now that's been burned by the big short and so on. But do you feel optimistic about the way that things are going with the economy and with the media? Yes. You know, and I have to say as a writer, the pieces that seem to get lots of readers are the ones that involve alternative interpretations or what we call heterodox. I'm sad to say that it's called heterodox interpretations of the state of the economy. I think that people realize that the 2008 sort of like exploded this confidence in what they call the site users. Because this whole theory about markets being efficient. Right. Yes. Right. And that then that then that these keep government stay away. Prices will then solve themselves and so forth and so on. And they taught that for about 40 years. Yeah. Right. Without any interruption or a real challenge. And a lot of people who said stuff that were as interesting, they were just forgotten. But you know, they called the last crisis a Minsky moment. And I'm a big fan of Hyman Minsky, an American economist who is just completely ignored. I mean, he had a great career, pretty decent life, taught in pretty good colleges. But his works were ignored. But now they called 2008 a Minsky moment. And suddenly for a lot of people, they say, who's Minsky? Why didn't anybody talk about Minsky before the crisis? And so I think that we live in an age where the academies are now realizing that the students want to know more about other ideas about economics. I've noticed this from different websites that are where students are pushing greater diversity in interpretations. If the academies start to offer research that counters the standard stories, and then journalists will then have the tools to interpret. I think that we live in an age where that is definitely, that's a reality. It's something that can be realized. I'm optimistic about better economic information arriving at people's inboxes. Why do you do this work? My dad was an economist, and I am a writer. But my son is an economist. So there's a gene somewhere in there. And I was not very like, I didn't ever, I never talked about economics in my son. But I always feel like economics is a moral science. And I'm fascinated with the issue of how do we construct our relationships socially. And so to me, that has been my project. I don't see myself as, my father could have called himself an economist. And my son is more mathematically minded. I think he's even more like mainstream economics. But I find myself to be much more a moral philosopher. And so is Adam Smith, the person who founded economics with Wealth of Nations. But his first book was a Theory of Moral Sentiment. That to me is his more important book. But it's just, it's like, I want to know how we as humans can live, can improve the way we live. That's, if I'm not putting this correctly, I want us to find out how we can be better humans. And so that's, that's it. So it is, it is a philosophical project for me. That's wonderful. Thank you. Pitchfork economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week.