 The Democratic Party was either complicit in or leading in many cases a lot of the neoliberal ideas and policies that have created the inequality that we find in our economy today. The Democratic Party is the most important political party in the world. That's why it's especially important today that the Democrats develop the backbone, stand for something and provide a real alternative to the Republicans. It's really important for Democrats to think about what we want to be in the future. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer. It's like Econ 101 without all the BS. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm Paul Constant and I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. Paul, today we get to bring back our old friend, James Kwok, Professor James Kwok, who wrote that fantastic book, Economist, a couple of years ago. Just to remind listeners, Economist was a book about what we call Econ 101ism or otherwise known as neoliberalism. It's this set of ideas that are loosely based on neoclassical economics like raising wages, skills, jobs, and people are paid what they're worth. The only methodology that works in structuring a human economy is through markets and so on and so forth. That was a super interesting book. He's just written essentially a new book. Does he call it a book? He does call it a book. It's an interesting set up here. He's got a book called Take Back Our Party, Restoring the Democratic Legacy. The way he released it was as a series on the American prospect. He had something to say about this immediate political moment as we head into 2020 and the publishing industry is so painfully slow that the only way he could do it was to go through a magazine. It's an incredible document, this book, because you've heard all of the arguments before, I think, Nick. I think that many of our listeners have heard a lot of the facts and the figures that he's building on in Take Back Our Party. It's a really intelligently and elegantly structured argument that the Democratic Party has just failed in this moment. The cool thing, I mean the important part of this effort, I think, is acquainting Democrats – and this is very painful for a lot of people – acquainting Democrats with the degree to which the Democratic Party was either complicit in or leading in many cases a lot of the neoliberal ideas and policies that have created the inequality that we find in our economy today. I think that's the big lift here and the important lift. I think that the central point he's making is there used to be a party of big business and rich people, the Republicans, and a party of the people, the Democrats. At some point, that kind of went away, that we both became parties of the economic elite and the rest is history. That was a serious screw-up. It will be fun to talk to James about how that happened and why that happened and who led those changes. I guess here is where we would put in a trigger warning. If you're a Democrat who doesn't like to hear criticism of the Democratic Party, then this episode is for you. It will upset you, but I think it's really important, especially at this moment when we're releasing this episode, for Democrats to think about where the party has failed and succeeded and what we want to be in the future. Nick, I think it's helpful before we talk to Professor Kwok to give some real-life examples of neoliberalism in the Democratic Party. We have some examples from Bill Clinton, Barack Obama, and Hillary Clinton framing policies and ideas in a neoliberal way. The first example we have is President Bill Clinton during his 1996 State of the Union when he's talking about the importance of limited government. We must answer here three fundamental questions. First, how do we make the American dream of opportunity for all a reality for all Americans who are willing to work for it? Second, how do we preserve our old and enduring values as we move into the future? And third, how do we meet these challenges together as one America? We know big government does not have all the answers. We know there's not a program for every problem. We know and we have work to give the American people a smaller, less bureaucratic government in Washington. And we have to give the American people one that lives within its means. The era of big government is over, but we cannot go back to the time when our citizens were left too thin for themselves. The idea of limited government is intrinsically neoliberal. It's taking this idea that Ronald Reagan popularized that all government is bad government, and the role of government should be to shrink itself to a point where it can basically be taken away entirely at some point in the future. Bill Clinton took this limited government idea and ran with it. And under the auspices of bipartisanship basically affirmed the reality in America that government is a bad thing. There's a famous Ronald Reagan quote from 1986. He said, the nine most terrifying words in the English language are, I'm from the government and I'm here to help. Bill Clinton took that joke and turned it into policy, which is kind of the quintessential neoliberal move. Our next example is Barack Obama. A lot of critics on the left today argue that Barack Obama wasn't as liberal a president as he may have seen at the time. And in retrospect, this does seem pretty clear. Here's a clip from his inaugural address in 2009 that shows that he was already coming into office with a Clintonian or neoliberal framing in his approach to government. The question we ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether it works, whether it helps families find jobs at a decent wage, care they can afford, a retirement that is dignified. Where the answer is yes, we intend to move forward. Where the answer is no, programs will end. And those of us who manage the public's dollars will be held to account, to spend wisely, to form bad habits, and do our business in the light of day, because only then can we restore the vital trust between a people and their government. Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill. Its power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched. But this crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control. Clinton Obama of course is a writer and is a lot more eloquent than Bill Clinton in his, especially in his speeches. Clinton tended to go off book and riff to fair amount. So it's a little bit harder to parse out what Obama was saying there, but at the center of that clip he is saying that the market is unquestionably a force for good. He's making a case for a little bit of regulation. He's maybe stepping back just a tiny bit from Bill Clinton, but he is making some pretty huge assumptions about the economy in his inaugural speech that place the market and not the middle class at the center of the economy. By doing so he's sort of setting the stage for what he then went on to do with the bailouts by bailing out banks and leaving homeowners to twist in the wind when their mortgages were put in peril. What he's doing here is laying the case for a very market centered economy that then would trickle down and help the American middle class, which is arguably the biggest economic failing of his administration. And it's right there in his sort of opening statement. And you can also see this in the Affordable Care Act which used markets and the private sector to achieve a public good. By which I mean the government has a very limited role in healthcare under the ACA. It is basically used to sort of funnel the unquestionable good of the private sector to people. Its role is basically distribution not actually affecting outcomes the way that a single payer healthcare plan would. Right in his inaugural speech you can see his opinions on how the economy works and it's a very neoliberal understanding of the economy. And our final example is from Hillary Clinton in one of her 2016 debates with Senator Bernie Sanders. Clinton, again, here is leaning more towards the Obama flavor of neoliberalism as opposed to the Bill Clinton version. But listen to this. I think what Senator Sanders is saying certainly makes sense in the terms of the inequality that we have. But we are not Denmark. I love Denmark. We're the United States of America and it's our job to rein in the excesses of capitalism so that it doesn't run amok and doesn't cause the kind of inequities that we're seeing in our economic system. But we would be making a grave mistake to turn our backs on what built the greatest middle class in the history of the world. This is something that actively bothered me at the time I remember when she says that we're not Denmark in America. And she doesn't explain that. She doesn't say why we're not Denmark, what qualities make America different from Denmark, why it wouldn't be possible to do it. She just says we're not Denmark. The implication here is that our version of market capitalism delivers prosperity. It subscribes to the America is the greatest nation on earth. And therefore we are inherently different somehow. But where she lands on this is she's talking about how she's reaffirming Obama's inherent idea that government's role should be limited in controlling the markets of health care and stripped down to basically a distribution model and at worst case a referee who decides which way the market should flow. And it's building on the Obama idea that that government should be a limited actor to not even harness the private markets but to sort of funnel it to where they can do the most good. Like with Obama, Hillary Clinton's case sounds kind of believable from the outside. It sounds a lot like what we're saying here at Pitchfork Economics because we believe in capitalism in general. But I think the important distinction to make is that Clinton said that the economy built the strongest middle class in the history of the world whereas we believe that the strongest middle class in the history of the world is what built the American economy and what makes the American economy great. It puts the cart before the horse to use a cliche by saying that middle class economic strength is a consequence of a strong market whereas it's really the other way around. And that's the central distinction between progressive thinking, liberal thinking and this sort of neoliberal apologist for the market thinking that Kwok is talking about in his great book and what we talk about on this podcast when we talk about neoliberalism. And now that we're all on the same page, here's Professor James Kwok. My name is James Kwok. I'm a professor at the UConn School of Law and I just finished a book called Take Back Our Party with Storing the Democratic Legacy. In your book, you make an argument that is even, how should I say it, spicier than the argument that we traditionally make which is that the world has been taken over by neoliberalism, what you call the economism in your last book. But you're making it even sharper argument which is that it wasn't just Republicans. In fact, it was Democrats too. And then in many ways, the degree to which neoliberalism infected the Democratic Party was perhaps more harmful to citizens and certainly harmful to the Democratic Party than people understand or sort of give credit to. I think so. I mean, I think Democrats play a crucial role in this story. I mean, to put it in context, of course, in many ways the conservatives are worse, more ridiculous, more ideological, more given to taking the side of the wealthy. But I think that's in a sense, less to be expected. And if you start a two party system, you're going to have a party of the rich, you're going to have a party of big business. And the counterweight is supposed to be the party of the people, the party of ordinary people, the party of workers, whatever. And we used to sort of have one, not quite in the Western European social democratic sense, but FDR, LBJ, we had that party. And that was the counterweight to the conservative zealots. And I think the counterweight has vanished, might be too strong a word, but it's certainly gotten swept along. It's become shriveled. It might be a good party of capitalism. Yeah, exactly. And I think, you know, right now, with no exaggeration, the Democratic Party is the most important political party in the world. I mean, the Republicans are just gone and far gone beyond just the economist and what I talked about with you last time, certainly with Trumpism. I think they're beyond hope at this point. The impeachment is only making that more clear. And that's why it's especially important today that the Democrats develop the backbone, stand for something and provide a real alternative to the Republicans. Because again, they are the only, you know, I don't believe we're going to have a viable third party in my lifetime. The Democrats are the only hope we've got, I think, in this political system, sad as it is to say. Can you talk us through a little bit how neoliberalism came to eat the brains of the Democratic Party and sort of how we got to this place? You know, the rise of conservative economic thinking on the right among the Republicans is well known, has been documented a lot. And I think among the Democrats, it was largely a case of it was two things. It was me tooism. You know, they saw how successful Ronald Reagan was, which is a very simple message, you know, in these times, government is not the solution, government is the problem. And then I think the other aspect, and one thing I think that is somewhat original to my book, not entirely, is the idea that the Democratic Party from essentially from the Democratic Leadership Council, from Bill Clinton onwards, you know how people often construct identities in opposition to what they don't want to be? They did not want to be the old Democratic Party, which they saw as a party of welfare, redistribution, you know, union bosses, welfare queens, poor people, factory workers. That was the image of the Democratic Party that Ronald Reagan foisted on them. And instead of fighting back, they kind of accepted that. And they said, well, we don't like that either. We want to be a new Democratic Party. The quest of the new Democrats, the Democratic Leadership Council, Clinton, Gore, Benson, those people, was to come up with a new Democratic identity that was not unions and welfare, but at the same time was not just conservative republicanism. They knew they had to, they couldn't just completely copy the Newt Gingrich contract on America. In a political sense, it was very successful. They created this new platform. They said, we're the party of growth and innovation and finance and technology and a bright new future when everyone's going to have, you know, a high skill job in college education, and economic growth will benefit everybody. That was the story. And I think it was a compelling message. The problem is that, you know, it was kind of empty as policy and it failed for reasons we can talk about. And that, I think, was the crucial moment when they said, okay, Carter was crushed, Mondale was crushed. We don't want to go back to being the party of the New Deal and Social Security and workers. We want something new. They chose this new identity. And in doing so, they became, you know, they became the second party of capital as the, you know, as Gingrich moved the Republicans to the right, the Democrats basically took the space that used to be occupied by Rockefeller Republicans. That's the two party system we have today. In their defense, they were surrounded by very smart sounding neoclassical economists who were telling them that markets were perfectly efficient and people were perfectly rational and tax cuts for rich people created growth. And there was an absolute and direct trade off between increasing wages and the number of jobs and all sorts of other crap that was, you know, consistent, internally consistent, but not true. And you know, I think people bought it. I mean, I know they bought it. Like they just thought it was true. And so the political narratives and policies that they adopted were consistent with those beliefs and the rest is history. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I think that a lot of these people were well-meaning and a lot of them were certainly very smart and well-educated beginning at the top, you know, with Bill Clinton and his staff. And you know, I say at the end of, I think the end of chapter one, chapter one describes the kind of the transformation of the Democratic Party. And I say at the end, essentially, this was a coherent vision, right? The vision was what we're going to do is we're just going to manage the economy better. And if we manage the economy right, if we make markets work and if we, you know, it was a doctrine of growth and opportunity, right? If we make markets work, so we have more economic growth. And if we help people, disadvantage people by helping them get a better education, basically, when they say opportunity, they mean education. Yes. We'll let everybody tap into this growth. And I say at the end of the first chapter, this is, yes, this is the Republican vision, but it's not nonsense, Kalana's face. It kind of makes logical sense. Yeah. That's why I think it's important to say, okay, now it's 25, 30 years later. Let's look at what happened. I think we all know what's happened. I mean, the 1% has done fabulously well. And the, you know, the 75th to 99th percentile has done pretty well. And everyone else has done poorly. So we've had growth and it hasn't trickled down. And we have, you know, as we as we know, deep seated economic insecurity. And I think their vision in a sense, they had a chance and it failed. Yeah. One of the really interesting things that I've experienced, and I'll bet you many of our listeners have experienced is that when you suggest, when as a Democrat, you suggest to other Democrats that we have been complicit in this shit show, people get very angry and defensive. So it would be fun if you could give some examples of what we did and where we went wrong that were specific to give, you know, to frame out a little bit more what we mean. So I mean, the two examples that come most readily to mind are probably familiar to some of the audience. I'll try to be quick. I mean, the most obvious is the natural deregulation. I won't spend more than 30 seconds on that. But from essentially from the late 1980s until the, you know, early 2000s, the natural deregulation was entirely a bipartisan affair, you know, led by, co-led by Republicans and Democrats, led by Bill Clinton and his Treasury Department. And the landmark pieces of legislation we think of like the Grand Leech-Plyley Act, which overturned the Glass-Steagall Act and the Commodity Futures Modernization Act, which deregulated derivatives, these were under Democratic administrations. And you know, with the consequences that we all know, I think we did not just have a housing bubble and a collapse in this scary moment in 2008, but the long-term kind of wealth effects of the financial crisis and Great Recession were extremely inequality increasing, because at the very top, people's wealth is largely based on their stock portfolios, which as we know have tripled, maybe quadrupled, I'm not sure, since 2009. And in the middle class and below, people's wealth is basically due to the value of their houses, which have not come back. Second example, again, probably familiar to much of the audience is welfare reform, which was again a bipartisan accomplishment. In 1992, Bill Clinton essentially ran to the right of George Bush on welfare reform, saying, and his catchphrase was two years in the off. He got two years of benefits and then you're done, you can't get cash assistance. And a lot of research has gone into welfare reform, the effects. And I would say that I think no one would argue it was inequality increasing, in the sense that some people on welfare with better educations, better health, more stable family situations, were able to get jobs and work. But essentially at the bottom 40% or so of welfare recipients were not able to get jobs. A lot of them have been cut off from cash assistance and we've had this explosion in the number of people in extreme poverty. So I'll mention those two, just to give me a clearie second, I just want to mention Obamacare as well. Obamacare, I think, was a step forward. It was certainly an improvement on what we had before, but I think it's an example of the kind of technocratic, democratic solution, which is we want everyone to have health insurance. We want everyone to afford it. To me that sounds like we need a national government program where you pay taxes based on your income and everybody gets health care. But no, we decided to do it by harnessing the power of private markets in these exchanges. We have this extremely complicated system, which I think is bound to fail in five to ten years, essentially because it doesn't have the ability to control costs. So I think as people know, the scandal of today is not just that people are uninsured, the number of people who are uninsured declined and has been stabilized, but that many people who nominally have insurance can't afford it because all of the costs are being shifted to the back end, to deductibles and copayments. So again, Obamacare was better than nothing, but it's an example of how dedicated this generation of democratic policymakers was to the idea that we always have to use the private sector and markets. And it's an example, I think, of the limits of that approach. You know, it is true for me as a 43-year-old man to say that Obama was the best president of my lifetime, but also that he was a disappointment and that he continued these neoliberal policies. But when I say that, people get very upset, Democrats. And there's a lack of sort of introspection in the party and a refusal to accept criticism. And I was wondering if you could maybe talk about, you know, what kind of reception you've gotten with this piece and if you have any ideas for how people can critique the party with minimizing the sort of pushback from Democrats. I'm not sure I have a good answer for that last question. I'll see if I can think of one. I mean, the challenge is that Barack Obama was a rock star. And I think looking back, you know, I would say among the politically astute left, Obama's image is very equivocal at this point. I mean, many people have negative opinions of Obama. Obama is the challenge. I mean, looking back, even back to 2006, 2007, you know, I initially supported John Edwards, not Obama. Of course, John Edwards turned out to be awful in many ways. My opinion of Barack Obama from the beginning is this man is a moderate. And I believe there's actually a quote, which I've heard it said that Barack Obama himself said during the campaign, essentially something to the effect of, I am a screen on which other people project what they want to see. And people wanted to see because he was an African American, the first African American president, which is an enormous accomplishment, wanted to see the next Abraham Lincoln. You know, they wanted to see the next FDR. And Barack Obama, he was he's from the same mold as Bill Clinton and Tim Geithner and Larry Summers and all of them. He's an extremely educated, extremely smart, extremely ambitious, a murder quad. You know, he was the editor in chief of the Harvard Law Review. The people who want to be editor in chief of the Harvard Law Review are basically people who are driven by ambition and making the next the next long on the ladder. And that isn't that's perhaps beside the point. He has this political magic. He was able to govern as a centrist and to do things like negotiate a grand bargain with John Bayner, which of course fell through in which he offered a decrease in Social Security benefits. He was able to do all of this while because of his image in his charisma opposing as a man of the people. Because of that, his legacy, his images, you know, it's sacrosanct among a lot of Democrats, which is causing problems in this primary right now, right? Because people like Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders cannot criticize Barack Obama. And all Joe Biden has to do is say, I was Barack Obama's vice president. And you know, it's interesting. There are specific issues on which many Democrats now say Obama was wrong, like deporting, you know, he deported more immigrants than anyone before him and Afghanistan. But now it's pretty clear that he was part of the unnecessary perpetuation of Afghanistan. But he has this magical charisma. People say, OK, he may have been wrong about this. He may have been wrong about that, but he was a great man. Yeah, but at least he could string a sentence together. Well, I mean, also in comparison to his predecessor and his successor, you know, as Paul said, there's no comparison. What I want to have is, yeah. Yeah, but it is highly problematic politically because he did govern as a neoliberal. And Hillary Clinton ran as a neoliberal. Yeah. And now Joe Biden is wanting I wouldn't say he's wanting as a neoliberal, but Joe Biden is running as a return to the good old days. Yeah. Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Yeah, pretty much. And and what I would say is that I think that, you know, I said earlier, the Democratic Party is the most important party in the world. And I think, you know, the my very high level impression of the past 30 years of politics has been Republicans are in power. They move the country to the right. Democrats are in power. We kind of hold the line for a while and then we know the Republicans will come back into power and move the party to the right. And so sure, Biden, Biden would be better than Trump. There's absolutely no question. But I don't I don't feel like Joe Biden is going to move the country is going to undo much of the damage of the past 20 years. And at some point, the Republican will win again. That's right. I mean, the reason that I think that in particular, the policy agenda of people like Elizabeth Warren is so indispensable to the future success of the party is and the country, frankly, is that only by enacting policies that ambitious can you make a significant enough difference in the lives of ordinary citizens for people to again conclude a that government can make a difference in their lives. That's positive and be that the Democratic Party stands for more than being just feckless corporate stooges to end in the absence of that kind of material, substantive sort of vivid change. You know, bad things will happen. Look to the country and to the party. There are two good points, two ways. I mean, one is that even to the extent that the Obama administration did things that were good as opposed to bad, I'm not an expert on this. Other people have written more about it. They tend to do it in ways that people were not aware of. So as I recall, there was I think there was a payroll tax cut, which was intended as an economic stimulus. And they purposefully made it invisible by essentially by reducing people's withholding, whereas George W. Bush sent people a check. And this was done probably for the best economic intentions. But even when the Obama administration used the power of government, they disguised it and they rhetorically talked about innovation and private sector and all of these things. The second thing I'll say, you know, building on what you said about the you know, the Warren policy platform is that this is something I say in the book. So I think that the Democrats did a lot of things for ordinary people from the 1930s to the 1960s, maybe early 1970s when we still controlled Congress. And those real material improvements in people's lives, social security, Medicare, Medicaid, and so on, people felt those people understood that the government was helping them. And there was a, you know, 20, 25 year lag. What I mean by that is for 20, 25 years, people still thought the Democratic Party had the backs, even when they were not really doing anything for them. But that wears off eventually. And what I feel like has happened in the past few years is, you know, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi stand up and they say, well, all about jobs and workers and you know, the 99% not the 1% and no one believes them. So it will take a long time, as you say, of actual policy to, yes, as you say, first of all, get people to believe that government can do something for them and also get people to believe that the Democrats actually care about them instead of just counting on those votes in November, which is we found out we can't count on this anymore. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting. You know, like, again, I talked to lots of Democrats who simply cannot understand why other people do not believe that the Democratic Party is on their side. But, you know, like you have to only point out things like, like the biggest impact on wages for working people over the last 10 years has been the increases in the minimum wage. Yeah. But the Democratic Party had nothing to do with that. Yeah. Like literally nothing to do with the increases that have happened in the minimum wage. The $15 minimum wage was not a product of the Democratic Party. It's all been local. It's all been activists acting independent of the party. Now some of those activists may have been Democrats, but, you know, it took the United States Senate six years, I think, to agree that a $15 minimum wage was a good idea. Of course, Barack Obama was president for eight years. And the highest he ever talked about raising the minimum wage was to 10-10 at the very end, at the very end of his term. And you know, people wonder why working people don't think we're on their side. You know, it's just nuts. At the moment, we do have some Democrats who I think largely agree with you and have these populist ideas. Let's call them for the sake of pulling it out of the primary and making it a larger conversation about the party, like the AOC wing of the party, right, where they're talking about a broader populist economic standpoint. But there are still plenty of elites or neoliberals. I guess the question is, how do you see the party moving forward? Is there a way to keep the, you know, save us from the neoliberal strike back? What do you think is going to happen? I think this is, you know, this is perhaps the most controversial thing that I think and say. And that is that I often think we need to learn from the conservatives. And there are certain things we should not learn from them, like, you know, divisive politics and turning one side of Americans against another. There are two, I think. One is that the conservatives figured out, okay, in the 1950s, they were completely in the world of this. They said, we have to have bold ideas. You know, we have to say things like, you know, government regulation is bad, the free market will solve everything. We need bold ideas and we need to stand for something. And people have to know what we stand for. And even if, you know, even if we're a small minority, that's okay. We have to have faith that we can convince people and they will move in our direction. And the second thing I think, and this is probably the most controversial thing I'll say is that the conservatives, in my opinion, and I'm simplifying slightly, but they felt it was more important to stand for something than to get every single vote in the next election. And, you know, the history of the conservatives is primarily the moderates, even when it meant that they were going to give, that they were increasing the chances that the Democrats would get the seat because they were, you know, putting up conservatives instead of moderates. And in the long run, they've been, this is the success story of our lifetimes when it comes to politics. I mean, it's, they've achieved more than, you know, Barry Goldwater could possibly have imagined possible. So I think that on the Democratic side, so perhaps we don't want to go to that entirely to that extreme, but on the Democratic side, we are so terrified of losing any independent voter and we are so dedicated to this mythical median voter who doesn't actually exist. That, you know, you know, the rhetoric is always about unity and avoiding factionalism and, you know, making sure that we unite behind the person who's most able to beat Trump, which is code for Joe Biden. And in the best case, what does it give us? You know, the last time we had the presidency in both houses of Congress was 2009, 2010. Party policy was being dictated by Joe Manchin. Right. That's why, that's why when we are in power, we can't achieve anything because we are willing to let, basically we're willing to let conservatives into the party and let them hold the balance of power. And I just don't see the point. So I think we need to, that's what I think. And it's very controversial. You know, people will say, Supreme Court abortion, we, you know, we have to win every election is like the most important election of our lives. We have to win this. We have to make any compromise to do so. And that's not what the conservatives did. And that's all. It's not how they went last 50 years. Right. No, it's so true. And you know, the other, the other big challenge is, you know, just the sociology of, you know, how politics were, you know, I spend a lot of time with rich people. And if you're sitting around in a $20 million ski home talking about politics with a bunch of friends, it's remarkable how many people agree that Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren would be terrible for the country and makes them not want to be Democrats. And the problem, of course, is that Democratic politicians spend a lot of time raising money in those houses. Yeah. And that's, you know, it's very challenging. It's not just the money, by the way. It's the, you know, it's easy to be persuaded by, you know, a group of earnest, you know, most smart, successful people that a wealth tax is a bridge too far. When it probably isn't. You know, I'm glad you say that. Yeah, I'm glad you say that, Nick, because obviously you've been among a lot of rich people. I've been among a lot of rich people. And, and there is a, I think it's human nature when you are, no matter who you are, unless you're Bernie Sanders, who I think just doesn't give a damn, right? I think it's human nature when you're with these titans of the private sector who have made billions of dollars to, I don't know, partially, maybe a little bit to want their approval, but also to think that they have valuable things to say. Yes. Yeah. I mean, when I was a young person in the business world, you know, you meet a CEO, and the first time you meet the CEO of this big public company, you're like, wow, this guy must be a genius. And then, you know, after you meet 10 or 20 CEOs, you start thinking, okay, not so much. But you know, we have this cult of wealth in this country. And you're right, it's not just the money. It's, you know, if every Wall Street banker is telling me that Elizabeth Warren is going to mean the end of the world, then they must be right. Yeah, right. Exactly. One of the questions we always ask our guests, James, is why you do this work? What motivates you? You know, I've only had an intellectual career for about a decade. At the beginning, it was very exciting to see my name in print and have lots of, lots of web page hits and get my name in books. And that was quite a fine. On this book, I would say that more than anything I've written in the past, I wrote because I really felt it needed to be written at this moment. My previous books have been largely about Republicans and what they have done, because as I said earlier, the conservatives have been the driving force in American politics and policy in my lifetime. And to understand the problems we face today, I think you have to understand the damage that they have wrought on our country. But as I said earlier, right now, the Democrats are our best last hope for, you know, resisting the tide of conservatism and Trumpism and whatever else may come later. And I felt like, in a sense, this debate over the future of the Democratic Party is one of the most important debates we have right now. And I wanted to say what I had to say on the topic. I also wanted to get it out before the Democratic primary, which is the reason I didn't go with the traditional publisher, which would have taken until next summer. 2023. Yes, exactly. So, there are a lot of voices out there, a lot of people saying good things, a lot of people saying less good things. And it's hard to know, I've been around the block enough to know that it's hard to know what difference one person can make, but this time I felt like I had to try. That's awesome. Well, James, thank you so much for chatting with us. It's just a fascinating conversation and we appreciate your work and making these arguments. Thank you very much. Same to you. Okay, thanks Paul. Thanks. Take care. Take care. Thanks. Okay, bye. So, that was a super fun and interesting conversation. Sure to antagonize a lot of neoliberal Democrats. But Paul, one of the things that struck me about our conversation with James was the use of the word moderate, which is something we thought a lot about here. It's true. Yeah. And to us, what moderation has come to mean in the Democratic Party is balancing the economic interests of the top 1% against everybody else. That's what moderate is. It's basically conservatism. It's figuring out the way to make the least waves in the bathtub. And for sure, how to govern without materially antagonizing economic elites. We mess around at the edges and that's moderation. But you know, or centrism, that's another word that's often used. And we strongly believe that true centrism means governing towards the middle, towards the center. Right. And that enacting policies and building narratives that benefit the broad middle of society, which means that policies like raising the minimum wage a lot that seem not moderate, really at the end of the day are. If you raise the minimum wage high enough so that it actually affects the center of the income distribution, that's centrist. If you raise it just a tiny little bit so it doesn't antagonize rich people, that's not moderation. That's capitulation. That's appeasement in the face of the neoliberal onslaught. Yeah. It's another way to look at it would be that the feathers that it ruffles are only the feathers of the richest Americans. And you know, if you're pissing off those people, then you're probably doing something right at this point in the economy. Correct. Correct. And in that conversation, I did allude to being among rich people who, you know, substantially agree that things like a wealth tax are anti-American and... Right. They're bad for everyone. I'm sure. I'm sure they've got my best interests at heart when they're in Aspen discussing how the wealth tax is going to hurt them. But what I sometimes do and sometimes don't remind them is if they didn't hate it, if people like me don't hate it, you're probably on the wrong track. Eat your spinach. Yeah. So we're clearly at this moment in the party where we're kind of at a crossroads. And I think a super good example of that has to do with the New York Times presidential candidate endorsement. Say more. As a lot of people know, they had a TV show where they announced their endorsement. And much to everyone's surprise, they couldn't bring themselves to endorse a single candidate. Instead, they endorsed Elizabeth Warren, who is a progressive candidate. And they simultaneously endorsed Amy Klobuchar, who is about the most sort of moderate in the traditional sense the word candidate. So there is not... I mean, just setting aside the idea of a dual endorsement in the primary is being dumb because you are telling people to vote a certain way. They picked two candidates who couldn't be more separate, who couldn't be more different from each other in terms of policy, in terms of what they envision for the country. It is impossible to... You can't make a clear case of what you think you should politically do with these two candidates. There's nothing you can triangulate from that that makes any sense at all. And I feel like that is what the Democratic Party is doing right now. Yeah. It's trying to sort itself out. And by the way, we like Amy. She's a very capable woman. She was nice enough to stop by the office when she was last in town. And we had a great chat with her about policy and politics, but that she could not be more different than Elizabeth Warren. Absolutely, yeah. I'm not saying that she's a Republican or that anything like that, but I am saying that there is... Exactly. There is a lot of difference between her and Warren. President Klobuchar's America looks very different from President Warren's America. And for you to endorse both of them at the same time is mind boggling. It's impossible. And that speaks to the schizophrenia that's going on right now as we collectively sort out what the Democratic Party stands for and what it means to be a Democrat. And I'll tell you the other thing that James said that I truly love and think is right is that the Democratic Party is the most important party in the world today. Because it will sort of set the standard, be the standard bearer for the alternative to trickle down economics and neoliberalism and authoritarianism. And this plutocratic white vision of the future. And the Democratic Party has to figure out how you blend pluralism and an alternative to neoliberalism into a narrative and a message that a majority of citizens can get behind. Yeah. And the good news is that visions are forming of what this might look like. And there are people out there who are promoting this vision in a way that would have been politically unthinkable almost four years ago. 3.5 years ago. Yeah, exactly. So there is an actual discussion about the values that the Democratic Party wants to have and the policies that we need to move forward. The thing that I think is maybe the greatest danger comes back to that New York Times endorsement in that you can't have your cake and eat it too. And so you've got to make a choice. Yes. People hate to make choices. Exactly. And so that's really the challenge I think we're facing in the next few months as a party, as we move forward. Well, it was great to talk to James and it's great to see him continuing to write. He's a ridiculously smart and articulate spokesperson for these ideas. Yeah. And I hope this essay doesn't get him banned from the rooms where the people who need to hear it most work and live. Yeah. So this has been a really sort of high minded discussion about the future of the party. And next week we are about to swing in the other direction with a conversation about an issue that's affecting millions of Americans every day with a really deep dive into the mechanics and politics of predatory lending. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.