 I think that we used to have a very competitive ideological market and now we don't. The more genuinely competitive a market is, the better it is in all ways. It's better for consumers, it's better for the pace of innovation, it's better for the political process, so on and so forth. So we, would you agree? We agree on those principles. Absolutely. Okay. We can find where we disagree. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, where we explore everything you wished you'd learn in Econ 101. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm David Goldstein, Senior Fellow at Civic Ventures. You know, sometimes Nick, I think we may fall into the preaching to the choir trap on Pitchfork Economics in that we have some ideas about how the economy does work and doesn't work and then we look for really smart, interesting people who generally agree with us. And occasionally in these conversations, we'll make a little snide comment about the University of Chicago, the Chicago School, because that's where Milton Friedman and the whole neoclassical orthodox economics as we know it today. In particular, a deliberate attempt to animate the neoliberal there too. It comes out of the Chicago School, so we're going to take a little diversion here and talk to an actual University of Chicago economist. That's right. Luigi Zingales is a professor at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and he has been wavering a little bit. Technically, he's a Chicago School economist, not in the sense that he's necessarily of the Chicago School, but that he teaches at the Chicago School. I think he has economic views, which are, I don't even know what you would call it, more conservative than ours. Than ours. But he has written persuasively about competition and about capitalism and he's a super smart and interesting guy and it will be fun to compare and contrast our views with his. Right. He also has this wonderful book called Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists in 2003 and in 2012 he published Capitalism for the People, Recapturing the Last Genius of American Prosperity. That was the book that brought him to my attention. That's right. At least I read that book, loved the title, loved some of the book, did not always agree on his solutions. But it shows at least he's a creative thinker, a free thinker when it comes to at least examining the orthodoxies. Definitely. He's also, by the way, the co-host of a podcast called Capital Isn't and you know here on Pitchfork Economics we're big fans of economics podcasts. Exactly. Which people should listen to all the time. I am Luigi Zengales. I am a professor of finance at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. I'm a director of a center called Stigler Center whose goal is to study how vested interests are subverting the competitive market economy. So is it fair to describe you as an authentic Chicago school economist? No. Because first of all I don't know what a Chicago school is anymore and then I was told that I cannot represent the Chicago school. So I think that I am my own kind of economist. I love it. Okay. Good for you. Well good for you. That's good because we usually use that term as a pejorative. So let's start. In your book A Capitalism for the People you make this really important distinction between pro-market and pro-business. If you could just explain the difference as simply as you can to start with that would be great. Sure. In a sense first of all we hear these two terms used interchangeably every day especially in the political arena. And I think they are very different because businessmen and businesswomen love competition and free markets when they want to enter a new line of business. The moment they are in they want to increase the buyer to entry in order to make more profits. And so they all of a sudden their interest is to make markets less competitive less functioning to gain more profits. And I think that this is not necessarily bad if that's done at an individual level as long as we think about maintaining the system competitive overall. It's very bad when as policy makers we confuse the interests of businessmen with the interests of the market itself and the community at large. I think this is a great point and a distinction that is so important in understanding where policy went wrong. I've always phrased it slightly differently which is confusing the narrow interest of a few capitalists with the broad interests of capitalism. The two things often have almost nothing to do with one another and in fact are often at odds. And yet these terms have been used interchangeably when in fact there's no profit to be made in a perfect market is there? Exactly. Yeah in a sense in the textbook definition of a perfectly competitive market there are zero abnormal profits which means zero profits are above a proper return to capital. But yes there should be zero profits in reality we know that they're not. So let's get to why this distinction is important and why this the impact that this confusion has had in leading us to the problems we have in American capitalism today. Where did this start and what has it wrought? I think that in my view is a deterioration that took place with the demise of the Soviet Union and socialism and any fear of a communist takeover. In the old days not necessarily good but the old days where there was a very strong just that position between capitalist and socialist if you want to make it simple. The capitalists were forced to present a better picture better image and to think more broadly about what is good for society in general not just for a narrow set of large business people. Once that pressure disappeared and it became cool not only on the right hand side of the political spectrum but even the left hand side of the political spectrum of being businessmen and being entrepreneurial and making money then these two distinctions started to fade away. And I think that people started to use the two interchangeably and policy makers both on the right and on the left took that being pro-business was a good thing. And I think that that is true to this day. So we used to have I guess a competitive ideological market and now we don't. Yeah, absolutely. I think that we used to have a very competitive ideological market and I think that the competition was keep people more honest. To put in the context of the US tension I think in the 60s or 70s for the Democratic Party to be seen as too cozy with business would have been anathema. And as a result even the Republicans were forced to keep some distance. And in the mid 80s when the Blue Dog Democrats and Clinton came around as a sort of a young leader in the party and then eventually won the election I think that what he was basically doing is started to compete for who was more friendly to business and then was a really race to the bottom. I think that that diagnosis of where we went wrong a lot of it rings true. I think that the timing is a little off because you see the shift happening really starting in the mid 70s not with the collapse of the Soviet Union. It certainly accelerates after. Yeah, and I think it has to be true certainly. I mean as a progressive capitalist you know I'm a huge believer in markets and capitalism and believe it's the best social technology ever invented to create prosperity in human societies but the flavor of capitalism that we accept is the question at hand and the neoliberal order that established the policies that we have today was conceived for good reason which is that the opposing ideology which was communism and Stalinism and some really horrible things right like that you know that was conceived for good reason. As a counter narrative. I would submit to you that there were a bunch of ideas that came out of the economics profession a lot of it from Chicago that led people in both political parties to a policy framework that definitely ended up concentrating wealth and making our markets effectively less competitive. The idea that the only purpose of the corporation was to enrich shareholders and by so doing we maximize benefits to everybody being sort of the canonical example of that. Don't you think that the economics profession has some responsibility here and both birthing and then propagating these ideas? Obviously some of the ideas generated in the economic profession had an impact and some of that may have a negative impact but I think that what was remarkable was how these ideas were accepted not only if you want in the right hand side of the political spectrum but on the left hand side. I think that everybody talks about the Chicago School of Antitrust which is of course important and influential but the irony is that not only one of the key exponents of this school was Robert Bork and while he was trained in Chicago he was a Yale professor and exercised influence at Yale more than in Chicago but more importantly there were people like Areida and Turner that were at Harvard and they had a very similar approach and they made this mainstream and Bork for many years was a pioneer in the profession. Remember he did not make it to the Supreme Court so it's hard to say that he was kind of this mainstream guy. The mainstream guy were Turner and Areida who by the way were consulting at the time for IBM and were pushing the point that there is no monopoly and if they exist it's good for everybody and so on and so forth. So I think that the real turning point is not that there were some conservatives that were pushing this line. The point is that on the other hand there was nobody opposing it and it became completely dominant and became normal that the Secretary of State for Clinton became Robert Rubin and is like the most normal thing that the head of Goldman Sachs is a leading Democrat. Yes absolutely and I think you're dead right. The remarkable thing is that these ideas, we think of them as conservative political ideas today but they may not have been birthed as conservative political ideas. They've been unchallenged for so long. But they completely dominated the policy thinking on both the right and the left and that's why we're in the box that we're in. So Professor Zingales you welcome Bernie Sanders onto the scene then since he adds to the ideological diversity and competition here. That's good for the nation to have them there right? I think it's good for him to provoke. Yes I don't agree with most of his ideas but I think it is a useful challenge to the system and more importantly is interpreting a lot of dissatisfaction that is out there in America and by the way in the Western world because what is interesting in that we tend in America to interpret everything as specific to America but if you look around the world many of the movements that we have seen here have taken place somewhere else. In a sense if you think about Tony Blair he was a Labour Party leader but he was very similar to Clinton in his approach to business and what is the result is now they have Corbyn that makes Sanders look like a moderate. And then look at in Germany you had the leader of the SPD the Social Democratic Party, Schurter that after he stepped down he became chairman of Gazprom for Christ's sake not only chairman of a large oil company but of a Russian oil company of a country that is a threat to the Western world and this is unbelievable. Yes here's the really interesting thing that I want to sort of zoom in on is I think that you and we are in violent agreement about certain things I think the problem certainly on the analysis that's right and that we have made this terrible mistake of confusing what's good for markets and capitalism generally with what's good for business people and businesses specifically I think that we're in complete agreement with that and that the more genuinely competitive a market is the better it is in all ways it's better for consumers it's better for the pace of innovation it's better for the political process so on and so forth so we would you agree we agree on those principles. Absolutely. Okay so let's try and find where we disagree which I think will be more interesting so let's why don't we try and punch through some of the most ambitious proposals of Democrats running for president today a Goldie raised Bernie Sanders but if there are things that you think are egregious and not good for markets and capitalism why don't we try and talk about those things because I think that'll be interesting. Yeah we could start with the biggie which is Medicare for all. Yeah. Healthcare reform. Yeah. You had a very different proposal in your book. Yeah talk us through why you think Medicare for all isn't good. So there are two points of view one is what is the cost overall of the system. And I think that the fear is that having a system that protects everybody combined with the pressure to extend treatment and end of life is making room for a disaster in America and part of it already doesn't work very well is Medicare right because in this country we have a private system for the more healthy part of the market when people are young and then we socialize the losses when people are old and sick. The ultimate example is when it comes to for example people in dialysis that are extremely expensive they are not part of the private system so if you have a kidney failure you are immediately pushed into Medicare. It's one of the few cases in which you can enter Medicare before 65. So the system is privatized profits and socialized losses basically. That's a system as it is. Now can we have a more market function system. I think that Switzerland seems to have achieved that but I'm becoming more and more disillusioned about the possibility of moving toward that system. So I think that having a minimum level of care for everybody I think is probably the way to go. The question is what do you define minimum and how expensive this is going to be. I know that book was written in 2012 so it's been a few years. As I remember you basically advocated for health savings accounts not for providing some sort of minimum level of universal care. Have you moved on this issue? I am not so sure that I would describe my position back and necessarily as just having savings account. I thought it was useful to create incentives to use medicine in a more effective way. But yes I have slowly come to the conclusion that first of all it's very hard not to provide a lower bound for everybody. I come from not only a country a continent that has offered this to everybody and has become almost like a human right. So I think it's very hard that one of the richest countries in the world does not offer that to its citizen in some form or another. Here's the thing is that that continent somehow has managed to provide health care to every citizen and provides it at approximately some place between 45 and 60 percent of the cost per citizen that the United States provides health care with outcomes which are equal to or better than ours. And every single one of those countries has found a different way of doing this but none of them use our system which is this ridiculous quasi private system which largely amounts to the world's largest price fixing scheme which is what the American health care system is. And so to say that we can't afford Medicare for all which would be like imposing the Canadian system or the British system on the country which delivers better health care at half the price seems disingenuous. I mean put aside the politics of it and the difficulty of pushing it through. It's quite clear that if we did have the British system or the Canadian system or the Singaporean system or the French system a hundred percent of Americans would have health care collective we would spend about half as much per citizen and we'd get about the same outcomes. It seems like the market has failed dramatically when it comes to health care and we have to acknowledge that. Yeah we do acknowledge that but we also acknowledge that it's not really a free market in a sense the fact that we cannot import the very insulin that is produced here and it's sold in Canada at a third of the price cannot be imported back this is no market. No this is a price fixing scheme. It's a prefixing scheme. We agree on that. So that actually is a great segue into another topic which is well power political power lobbying reform which you talk about a lot in the book a lot of the reasons the reasons why we can't import that insulin why we can't negotiate with the pharmaceutical companies on prices is because the pharmaceutical industry successfully lobbied Congress to prevent that. So I guess first why is it important to reduce the power the political power of corporations and second how do we do that. Let me correct you just a tiny bit because it's even worse than you describe because the reason why we still have that ban or importation is that it was like a Faustian pact between the Obama administration and the pharmaceutical industry in which the Obama administration traded their support for Obamacare with the pharmaceutical industry in exchange for that and they said this is a lesser evil but they went ahead with that. So it's not just that they particularly lobby Congress is that they are so influential in blocking any change that even if you're well intentioned and we should give credit to Obama to be well intentioned if you're well intentioned at the end of the day you have to compromise in order to get something done. And so I think that that's part of the problem. The reason why in this country we don't have some formal universal health care is because the entrenched power of the incumbents was very strong and this is Truman proposed some formal universal health care in 48 and the American Medical Association lobby and advertise and scare everybody against that to the point that did not get passed. Punch through the policy proposals made by Democrats running for president that strike you as counterproductive and bad for the economy. I am kind of fiscal conservative so I would like to see the numbers of how you do this transition from the current system to the next one. I agree with you that all the other countries succeeded in having a lower cost of health care and one of the things that actually pushed me to come to more in the direction of universal health care is precisely see how increases over time of the cost of health care in America seems to produce less of an increase in life expectancy than in most other countries. It's not only that the level because the fact that the way I like to say the fact that the in Portugal or Italy people live longer might be due to the fact that they drink good red wine and they eat olive oil and they don't shoot each other. I think that those things have nothing to do with health care. That's the Mediterranean diet, red wine, olive oil and not shooting each other. But in addition to that you see that over time every dollar spent more in medical care in Italy or Portugal which are not model of efficiency by the way. I'm not using Switzerland or Sweden. It seems to have a bigger improvement in life expectancy in those countries than in the United States. So I think that there are enormous amount of inefficiencies. The problem is that moving from here to there is quite complicated especially because people want to be promised to retain what they have today. I think that introducing universal health care will bring some form of redistribution. There will be a lot of tension. The fear that I have is that the way you tend to resolve those tension is to just pay the hell out of it. It is a bit like Obamacare was introduced with a trade off in which you kind of cut down some of the cost of health care in exchange for expanding the coverage. But pretty quickly the cost reduction got eaten away especially over time and then you have only the bills. So I think that I'm concerned about spending and it keeps spending at a current rate. Especially in a world in which demographic increase seems to slow down and also our willingness to import people through immigration seems to be dramatically reduced. So the combination of these two factors I think should make us careful about expanding the debt to the extreme. And I come from a country that is struggling with a burden of a debt that finds it difficult to sustain and see the negative consequence of this are very large. So that's where maybe I'm different. I'm more fiscally conservative than many of the proposals out there by the Democrats. Speaking of expensive things, the Green New Deal. Can we afford that? What it means in terms of numbers and what it means in terms of allocation of money. What I'm concerned is about a lot of government money handed out fast to friends and family. This has been generally what a lot of these government programs are about and these are kind of very dangerous. If you are saying we want to tax gasoline more in favor of reducing some taxes on alternatives or even maybe create some small economic incentives for alternatives, I think that this is great. If you are talking about doing some infrastructure and investment to reduce the consumption of gasoline and in general CO2 emission, I think this is great. If you're talking about trying to close down, I know this will not make me very popular in West Virginia, but thank God I don't run for office, but close down some coal plants, I think this will be fantastic. I think that coal is one of the most pollutant fuel we have and we should try to cut it down as fast as possible. So maybe dedicate some money to keep it in the ground and pay for closing down those plants might be a good way to use the money. But I'm afraid that large quantity of money allocated that need to be allocated fast might lead to an enormous amount of waste. This year it's the 50th anniversary of the landing of the moon and when Kennedy, I think it was 1962, was when he proposed going by the end of the decade and they did it by 1969. People use that moonshot analogy. If we made a commitment by the end of the decade, the next decade to shift our electrical grid to renewables at an enormous federal expense, could we do that given the potential climate disaster that's coming? It's a very good question. The thing that surprises me is to the extent in which the push to go on the moon did not lead to fat contracts to contractors but was done in an expensive way, certainly, but not in a way that was corrupt and wasteful. I think that the NASA ran a pretty tight operation and with a really big, big push. I'm afraid that we don't have the institutions to do that anymore. I always compare Sweden with Italy and they say I'm much more willing to be for government intervention in Sweden because I know that government intervention in Sweden will be done relatively well and relatively impartially and with relatively little waste. I think that asking for government intervention in Italy is masochistic because most of the money is wasted. What do you think about wealth taxes? Senator Warren and Senator Sanders have proposed them. I'm not ideological opposed to wealth taxes. I think that it could be an interesting way to rebalance the burden of taxes and in particular, it could be a good way to avoid a lot of tax illusion. I have my own version of wealth tax which is the following. Imagine you take Senator Warren's wealth tax but you say that if you can prove that you have paid all your taxes on the income at the level of your wealth, then that's discounted from your wealth tax. If you cannot because you use all the values loopholes and etc., then you pay your wealth tax according to the Warren plan. It's sort of like AMT. Yes, a massive AMT for super rich people. Yeah, you're either paying 40% on all your income or there's a wealth tax. Yeah, the dangerous part in my view is the slipper's slope. In a sense, I think that I don't feel particularly pain for the billionaires who are imposed the tax. But of course, where do you stop in that process? Once you start to go down, then there are many, many more people that are affected more and so on and so forth. I think that the people are, in my view, afraid of once you introduce a principle where you stop and also the double warming. If you are paying fully your income taxes at that level, you're paying a lot of money and then you have this double warming. I think that having this mega alternative minimum tax is a good idea. Where do you come out on things like free college or student loan forgiveness? Student loan forgiveness. How about student loan forgiveness? I'm very much against a generalized student loan forgiveness because I don't understand why you want to target a gift only to a few people. In a sense, if you are willing to give a gift, why don't you give it to everybody? It is an exposed gift and is not particularly, I think, well designed. I think that having an expansion in state schools that can provide college at a cheaper rate is a great idea. Cracking down on for-profit colleges that really take advantage of many students by having them accumulate a large amount of debt with not a lot of value added, I think that in part, the problem is that many young students are confronted with the proposition of people saying having an education is priceless and here is the loan and you cannot fail. The truth is, it's not true. I think that the truth is that a lot of college tuition is not worth it, at least for a number of people, and might be excessive. So I think that giving free tuition exports or for giving loans exports creates terrible incentives including for colleges that need more competition to reduce their tuition. So I think that is the wrong recipe even if justified by a lot of good reasons. And honestly, I think that the biggest problem in America, in my view, is that the high school does not prepare most students enough. If a lot of the job that people do in college were to be done in high school, collectively as a nation will save an enormous amount of money. In your book, you make the case for school vouchers to address failing public schools. Do you still support that? Yeah, I think that they are a potentially very good solution. In the book, I explicitly said, and I think that this part should be expanded, to make that vouchers contingent on how difficult it is for those students to find the right school or overcome some natural disadvantage. So if I am a recent immigrant with not a very good background, I don't know what the good schools are, etc., I am a relatively more difficult student to train. And so the voucher I receive should be more valuable so that competition among schools will generate more of an interest to hire me or me as a student to compensate the bigger challenge. Most of the problem in our public schools is the current funding mechanism where it's largely based on local property taxes in most of the country. I grew up in the suburbs just across the city line outside of Philadelphia in an affluent district where we did then, and they still today spend twice as much per kid than they do in the Philadelphia school district where the needs are much higher, quite frankly, than where I grew up. There are great school districts throughout the country and they tend to be well-funded. Could we fix this just by through more equitable funding? I completely agree. I think that the funding of public schools in the United States is one of the most crazy things of the U.S. system. And I'm sorry to say I think there is a very big sort of racial segregation element behind it. And I think that I see the voucher system as maybe the easiest way to go around that. And I think that we need to change that system because it is tearing the country apart. And I don't know what is the easiest way to go at it, but it's not going to be easy because in a lot of suburbs there are people defending their privilege and their separation with all their strength. But I completely agree that we need to fix that problem. And I think that actually the voucher system is not a bad idea in that direction. My problem with vouchers has always been that it seems inconceivable to me that the voucher amount will ever equal the amount of money that you actually need. I mean, I use, for example, my own children I send to a private school that costs on the order of $40,000 per year per child. Public school kids in my state. This is in Seattle? Yeah. Wow. I thought it only in New York had those fees. No, no, no. It was in a different class. No, no, no. That's not true. That's not true. That's not true. That's not true. All of the private schools in Seattle cost between $35,000 and $40,000 a year. They just do. Well, cheaper than childcare. Yeah. But they're all priced approximately the same. And then you pay tuition and then you're supposed to donate too. Put that aside. Whereas in the public schools, I think the typical kid gets about $13,000 a year. And I find it inconceivable that we can solve this problem of higher need by simply vouchering a third of what it costs to educate my children to everybody else. Right? Like I'd be all for school vouchers if the voucher amount equaled the price that it costs to get into the best private school in the state. Because then you would know that everybody had available to them the amount of resources equal to the best system. Right? Or at least the system that the market says is the best system. But of course, not every school can be the best school. Not every teacher can be the best teacher. No, but at $35,000 per, you can be pretty sure that you get a pretty good outcome. Because look, the market has landed on a number in a place like Seattle. In fact, the market has landed on the same number in every major city in the country. And in fact, if you look at the way in Seattle, in Washington actually we do it better. About 75% of the funding comes from the state. It's not quite as unequal. 25% from local property taxes. And the state caps how much the districts can raise locally. But it doesn't cap how much the PTSDs can raise. And what you find in elementary schools in the Seattle area is that the PTSDs are raising 1,200. The wealthiest schools are raising 1,200, 1,500 dollars more a year per student. And in the poorer schools, they raise nothing. So if that 1,500 is being raised on Mercer Island or Stevens Elementary or wherever, that tells you the market has set that price that we need an extra 1,500 dollars per student. At a minimum. At a minimum. At a minimum. For the rich kids who don't have any special needs. Right. Right. Anyway, so I want your thoughts on one more thing, Luigi, which is shareholder value maximization. Shareholder capitalism. And the emerging notion that we need a new definition or a new way of constraining the capitalism and a new way to think about what the responsibility of executives is. Do you have thoughts on that? Have you thought that through? Yes, I actually have a lot of thoughts. I might disappoint you here. And my views are kind of at odd with both the mainstream and the mainstream alternative in the sense that I let me start from from the beginning. I think that in in a competitive market system. So that's a big if because today a lot of sectors are not very competitive and the competitive market system workers and customers have freedom of choice. So they don't like the way you're treated. You go somewhere else. You don't like the way the product looks like is charged. I go somewhere else. The only people that don't have this choice are the shareholders because it's true that I can sell the the my share. But when I sell I pay I receive what the value of that share is which is affected by the decision that the the company is making. So imagine that I make a decision and this case is not an hypothetical because it's actually a real case that was debated in court. Imagine that I am Craigslist and I decide that my goal is to give a service to all Americans and not to make profits. If I am a shareholder of Craigslist and maybe a minority shareholders of Craigslist I pay with my profits or lack of thereof a service that is provided to everybody else. If I'm not paying off as a employee at Craigslist I can leave but if I'm not paying off as an investor in Craigslist I cannot leave because if I leave I receive the price that reflects the fact that profits are much much lower because Craig decided Craig Newman decided to run the company a particular way. And so I think the shareholders have the right to be represented because if they are not represented they can be taxed without representation. It says business decision to forgive profits in exchange for a greater goods are a form of political decision whose burden is paid by the shareholders. And so while I do believe that companies can and sometime should have greater objectives than just that profits I think that who should establish those objectives are the one who end up paying for it i.e. the shareholders. So this is not the management is not society at large but the shareholders they want to pay the cost. But it's simply not true that shareholders can't leave you can sell at any time. I told you you can sell but you pay the cost it's like saying you're not taxed because you can leave. Okay but as a worker you also pay if you leave right you take enormous physical and personal and economic risk if you leave you lose pay when you're in between jobs you might have to take advantage of a better offer you might have to pick up and move your family elsewhere. Capital is more liquid than labor is in this case. Capital is very liquid example before you sink in but once I've invested my money in let's say Craigslist I cannot get out of it without paying a deep deep cost if Craigslist is mismanaged. On the other hand think about the computer scientists who work for Craigslist they can walk on the other side of the road and get a better job. So they are very liquid. But I can do the same thing I can take my money out of Craigslist I can sell and invest in one day buy some other stuff in one second. I can buy some other stock that I think will do better. So I acknowledge that shareholders are an important stakeholder in a capitalist enterprise and should be represented. I think the question is we have built an economic system where shareholders are the only stakeholders that are represented. Are you saying Luigi that under current laws and rules the shareholders themselves don't actually have much voting power in terms of determining how the company is run. I definitely say that but I also want to point out that the fact that today most corporations are for profits is not something that is imposed by law is imposed by free choice. Today in particular is possible to create benefits corporation where you put other objective in line and nothing prevents a new company to have a statue that say that workers should be represented on the board. Just choose not to do that. And why they choose not to do that is probably because it's not very efficient to do that otherwise they would. I mean it has nothing to do with efficiency it has to do with profit. You don't want workers represented on your board because if they were represented on your board you might have to pay them more and if you have to pay them more then you get to pay yourself less. That has nothing to do with efficiency that has to do with power and profit. It's not more efficient. Wait a second. If we are two starting organizations and we know that I'm able to attract better workers at a lower compensation because I promise more in the future if I give them voting rights. And so if this is a better organization again in a competitive market this form of organization should prevail. We know that in certain sectors take the university sector for example, cooperatives work pretty well because most universities are kind of not legally but de facto some cooperative run by faculty. And we have entry of for profit cooperation they have not done particularly well in this scheme. So we do have example of worker owned cooperatives. Think about law firms. In law firms we have a similar situation in which a group of workers, their partners who have voting rights. I guess the thing is that a corporation is not a product of free choice. A corporation is the product of politics, right? Like civil society grants corporations limited liability in exchange for generating benefits to the society. You could just as easily say that it should be legal for corporations to dump any pollutant in the rivers because the people who live in the community can move and the shareholders can't get out if they don't get to dump the pollutants, right? Like it's the same. No, no, no, no, no, no. It's the same. No, no, no, no, I completely, no, this, no, no, no, it's not the same. I think that externalities should be regulated and I'm... Poverty is an externalization. Like if I'm paying my workers so little that they can't survive without public assistance, I have generated an externality. If I'm paying my workers so little that they need to have three jobs in order to survive and therefore can't supervise their children, can't help them with homework, I'm creating an externality. If I'm paying my workers so little that they live in despair and take up drugs to make up the difference, I'm creating an externality. Like there are all sorts of externalities that are created by giving corporations the power to exploit people. First of all, the power to exploit arises only in a world where there is not enough competition. Maybe we fix the problem of competition to begin with, which exists. But second, if the problem is to lower wage, the easiest way to fix it is with minimum wage. It's not obvious why you want to give power to employees to obtain that result. The point is there is nothing that prevents labor to higher capital rather than capital to higher labor. In many situations, we see this is the case. I give you the university to understand that it's an example. Why we want to upset this expos? If you want to say that once a corporation is successful, then we should tax that corporation and redistribute money to its workers, okay, but it's a form of taxation. I don't know why you don't accept the fact that there are different forms of organization. There is an increasing number, by the way, of companies that set themselves up as cooperatives, as benefit corporations. People are paying attention. But even the most aggressive and liberal and progressive data firms in the Silicon Valley, they tend to set themselves up as for-profit corporations. That means something, right? Is why? Because they need to attract capital, and that capital will come only under certain conditions. Because we're in a competitive market, if they could provide alternatives, they would, but the dominant form to attract that capital is to give that capital voting rights. You know what? I'm going to need to cut off this. Oh, come on. We've taken you way too long already, so maybe we're going to have to have you back again and have a more focused argument between you and Nick. I think this is the nub of the issue, is how you conceptualize the role of the different stakeholders in society and how we call certain things standards and other things tax, how we think about what efficiency is, and I would just respectfully push back on that. I don't think it exists. I think that efficiency is, like a market is a complex adaptive ecology, and those systems aren't efficient. They can be effective if they're well-structured, and I think that's what we're- Markets are incredibly inefficient. My God, they're wasteful. And the question is, how do we structure those systems to be the most effective? The question is, what is the alternative? Right. Well, we're not over with you. This is the best. The market works better than- Any alternative. The question is, how do we make it the most effective mechanism for generating broad-based prosperity and stable societies? That's the question. Before we let you go, we want to ask the standard question. We ask everybody at the end, why do you do this work? Because I love it. What do you love about it? Honestly, I think that the study of economics is a study of how to improve people's lives, at least from an economic point of view. Of course, there are many dimensional people's lives, but I think that this is one, and it's very important. And being able to study how to do it is extremely rewarding. You have stated the only normative assertion we make in our economic analysis, that the purpose of economics is to improve people's lives. So we're with you 100% on that. Well, thank you so much for spending the time with us. It was lovely, and I hope we have other chances. If you're ever coming to town, please let us know. It would be so much fun to have you in the office, and if not doing a podcast, just chat generally about political economy issues. Anyway, thank you so much. Looking forward. Okay. Bye-bye. Thank you. Bye-bye. Bye. So, Goldy, the most interesting thing about that conversation with Luigi was that he had come farther towards us than I had expected. Do you agree with that? Yeah. So interestingly, I hadn't realized when I read his book, Capitalism for the People, but it was from 2012, and there were some things in there, like on healthcare, where his big solution was health savings accounts. And I was expecting to force him to defend that, but he didn't. He's looked at the results since then over the past seven years, and he's come around to the idea that we need some to guarantee some sort of minimal level of government-provided healthcare. Yeah, and we served him up what I thought were going to be all these softballs on the economic proposals coming out of the democratic primary, and I thought he would have been more harshly critical of those ideas, and he wasn't, which honestly surprised the heck out of me. I thought he was going to really hate them and forcefully articulate why they were bad ideas, or a bunch of them were bad ideas, and he did not. And at the risk of sounding self-congratulatory, I think, at least I would like to believe that that's because smart people in the economics profession are moving from these rigid orthodoxies on the right to more rational views about the role of government in managing market economies and are beginning to recognize that a lot of the fundamental assumptions that they had used before just turned out not to be true. Right. You know, when you wrote that Pitchfork's piece back in 2014? Yeah. 2014. Yeah. And this was in the midst of the $15 battle, we had just passed $15 in Seattle, and it was roundly criticized. Even by some of our allies, it's going too far too fast. A lot has changed since then. And one of the big things that's changed is, well, we've had things like $15, and none of the bad stuff happened. And where we haven't done things like this, inequality has gotten worse, and it's become clear that a lot of the orthodoxies that people just took for granted as recently as five years ago aren't working out. Right. Exactly. And I do think that because it's not just that the empirical evidence has mounted that these orthodoxies weren't true. There has been, I think, a pretty robust, organized pushback against the narratives, too. Right. There's a new theoretical understanding, new theoretical models that are being put together where we actually are beginning to have alternatives. You know, in our conversation with Luigi, he talked about, at the time, neoliberalism really just took hold of both parties. It's because there wasn't any alternative explanation. And now we've been developing and really building this new narrative around these alternative ideas. And you have to give some economists like Luigi credit for being willing to question their own orthodoxy and coming around. And I'd love to see all of the Chicago School. Yeah, exactly. You are welcome. I have a big tent here on the heterodox side of economics. We welcome you all to question all of your core values and models and come to us with an open mind. That's right. That's right. And the thing about these orthodoxies, in fairness to these folks, were that they were sort of like water to fishes. In other words, you don't even know it's there, really. Right. And the orthodox assumptions about human behavior and the dynamics of human social systems were just so embedded in people's both consciousness and subconscious that you just didn't even stop to question them. And it has been only the last, really, honestly, I think five, six, seven years when people have really begun to start to take a harder look at this stuff. Okay. The primary of this is Professor Zingales teaches at the Chicago School. I'm not really an enemy. No. No. Class traitor. Like me. Yeah. Interesting conversation, though, and a great guy. So I don't know how to say it in Latin, but on next week's episode, tune in and we'll talk about Economic Woman. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with the Young Turks Network. If you like the show, make sure to subscribe, rate and review us wherever you get your podcasts. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action and Nick Hanauer. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunk Works and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. As always from our team at Civic Ventures, thanks for listening. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week. See you next week.