 Hey Pitchfork Economics listeners, on an upcoming episode we'll be talking about this really core neoliberal economic idea called marginal productivity. It's the neoclassical economic idea that the market, because it's perfectly efficient, always pays you exactly what you're worth. So we want to hear from you, whether you're a minimum wage worker, an executive, or anything in between. Do you think you're paid exactly what you're worth? Tell us what you do and whether you get paid what you're worth and we'll try to play it on the show. And here's the number 731-388-9334. Thanks. Job creation in this country has not been equal when you look at geography and it has not been equal when you look at race and it's not been equal when you look at economic class. You might start thinking about this problem like this quiet, hidden epidemic that people who live with it bear all of these social costs. Politics is largely the art of the possible. If we can extend economic opportunity to people left out, then we will appeal to the better angels of this country. From the offices of Civic Ventures in downtown Seattle, this is Pitchfork Economics with Nick Hanauer, a conversation about how capitalism actually works. I'm Nick Hanauer, founder of Civic Ventures. I'm Paul Constant and I'm a writer at Civic Ventures. In the last episode, we talked about universal basic income and today we are going to talk about its close cousin, universal basic jobs. Yeah, so a job guarantee is similar but different than an income guarantee. There's a ton of conversation in wonky progressive policy circles around the notion of a job guarantee. It comes in all sorts of flavors in the same way that universal basic income comes in all sorts of sizes and flavors. But we're going to explore a jobs guarantee in this episode and I'm really excited to do it because just to give away a little bit, I think it's honestly a more plausible idea than universal basic income. Paul, tell us just in broad strokes what universal basic jobs, what it is. The idea is that rather than just giving people unemployment checks, although some plans do include unemployment as well, rather than just giving people unemployment checks, the government would give them a job, preferably in a field that they had some sort of expertise in. You saw this a lot in the New Deal with things like building dams or even making murals, public arts, things like that. So it's a way to keep people productive in exchange for money, performing valuable services that need doing in a way that sort of keeps the economy rolling, particularly in times of recession or depression. Yeah, I think a lot of that makes sense because there is an infinite amount in our country that needs doing, infinite amounts of childcare needs, teaching needs, elder care needs. Heck, trail building needs, firefighting needs. I mean, there's just so much infrastructure building. I mean, there's just so much that needs doing. And so the idea that the federal government will somehow backstop that with a big jobs program, particularly in recessionary times, is I guess the core of the idea. And it's kind of important to note that some progressive Democrats, including people who are running for president like Senator Sanders and Senator Warren and Senator Booker, have talked about guaranteed jobs. But they also are very clear that they have to be jobs with high pay, good benefits, things like that. This is not like a $7.25 an hour minimum wage job. And, you know, in the policy, you know, there's a bunch of policy objectives with respect to this idea. One of them is to limit essentially to end involuntary unemployment, to make sure that everyone who wants a job can have one and not just a crappy job, but actually a decent job that pays well. But the other policy objective is to put pressure on the private sector to keep wages and standards high because, you know, the government jobs, obviously, you know, the point of them is to be good jobs. So anyway, that's an important element of it. Yeah. So the UBI and guaranteed jobs aren't necessarily separate ideas, although we have broken them up into two distinct episodes. Generally, the two ideas are sort of pitted against each other in the discussion amongst wonks. And I know that people who favor the UBI say that guaranteed jobs would be inefficient and that UBI would offer more freedom and not trap people in a specific job or sort of keep them in government work when they could be in the private sector. To be clear, there's a bunch of people in our economy who cannot who actually cannot work more disabled than one way, in one way, shape or form. And we're going to need to find ways to support them. But certainly we should have a system that enables people to want to work to work even in harder times. If you want to get the get an understanding of guaranteed jobs, there's one person you call and that's Pavlina Chernava. Professor Chernava is the associate professor and chair of the Department of Economics at Bard College and the research associate at the Levy Economics Institute. She's also the senior research scholar at the Center for Full Employment and Price Stability. Hi, Paul. Hi. Can you hear me? I sound I sound all right. Yes. Yes, I can. How about you? Yeah, you sound perfect. Thank you. I guess first, if I could ask you to just do the basics and explain what exactly is a job guarantee for people who might not know. Yeah, you can think of it as unemployment insurance to be contrasted with unemployment insurance. But the modern versions basically are rethinking those policies for the modern day. So you can think of it as a new deal for the modern era. You can think of it as an employment safety net where if somebody has lost their work and they're looking, there is always an option for them guaranteed. So that's really what the guarantee means in the title that it's a promise that there will be a federal program that will provide these opportunities on demand. I was wondering if maybe you could talk about some of the most frequent misunderstandings of universal jobs that you have to debunk. What do people think it is that it isn't, if that's clear? Yes, that's a good question. A lot of times people think that because it's a guarantee, you could just show up and the government just provides you a paycheck because the job is guaranteed. That's not true. It's a job like any other. You show up for work, you do the work, you get paid. You don't show up, you don't get paid. So that's one misconception. It's really a job like any other. We talk about it primarily as being a job in the public service sector and we can explain why that's preferable. But it's not a handout. So that's number one. The other thing that it's not work fair. There are concerns sometimes that what we're proposing is that taking away people's unemployment insurance or other benefits unless they show up for work at this program. And so there are work fair programs like this out there, but the job guarantee is not it. There's another big misunderstanding, I think, is that people who are sympathetic tend to associate this program with just infrastructure. So they're saying, oh, we're going to build bridges and provide jobs this way. But you have to really think quite a bit about whether it is possible to provide such a guarantee to everyone just by doing infrastructure investment. We need it. We definitely need it. But there are occasions when the economy really goes into a sharp downturn, a mass layoff, and it might not be easy to crank up infrastructure investment on short notice. And a lot of jobs that are needed actually in the service sector and the service area. So the job guarantee is really a tapestry of different kinds of employment opportunities in public service that are not limited to the infrastructure projects. It will include them. And the final thing is not temporary. So a lot of times people will say, well, you know, we could do public works in recessions. That makes sense. That's a big downturn. Lots of unemployed people. But the reality is that there are unemployment and unemployed people even in the best of times. They still need work and they tend to be quite invisible because the economy is doing quite well. But there are there are lots of problems associated even with smaller levels of unemployment. So it's not a temporary program. It's really part of the landscape of public policies that deal with unemployment and poverty. OK. So can you the socioeconomic costs of unemployment? You know, we often hear when we go to raise the minimum wage, we hear about the unintended consequences of of of raising the wage to 15 dollars an hour. What are some of the unintended consequences of keeping some portion of the population consistently unemployed? Yes, there is really a lot of work that comes from psychology and the cognitive sciences and public health that documents these very carefully. Unfortunately, economists don't make use of this research and public policy. So unemployment is related to virtually any and every socioeconomic problem out there. Just just to enumerate some of them, for example, even a short spell of unemployment has an impact on mortality. It increases mortality rates. And some of these impacts can be long term impacts. People who lose their jobs, obviously, there are scarring effects, like they lose their incomes. They may have more trouble getting back into the labor market than people who already have jobs. But health, mental, physical health problems are highly correlated with unemployment. Suicide rates, there's a there's a recent study that looks at 69 countries. Turns out suicide rates are much higher in terms of what was previously known, the relationship between jobs and suicide rates. There are so there are these psychological, there's these physical mental health problems, but they are not just problems for people who've lost their jobs. It turns out that their families, I mean, these are obvious things, but their families suffer from similar cognitive effects and their children suffer. So the obvious things like malnutrition, like growth stunting, like underperformance in schools, also highly correlated to having an unemployed parent. And then children don't do so well in the labor market. So losing your social network, your connections. And if you just add up all of these, you see you might start thinking about this problem like this quiet, hidden epidemic that is just invisible. But it people who live with it bear all of these social costs. And then, of course, our communities take some of the impact in terms of urban blight crime, economic crimes that may be related to joblessness or or poverty, inability to earn above poverty income. OK. And so so, of course, we measure employment in this country by the unemployment numbers. Do you think that we should be striving for full employment? Like should we be measuring our jobs by how close we are or far away we are from full employment? Well, look, I think that what we should be aiming for is a good society. Right. That's that's the ultimate goal. There's not a particular number. Now, if you expand your definitions, there's really good research that looks at proper calculations. You're probably looking at about double the numbers. Maybe 12 million people would be ready to take a living wage job if it were available. So the goal is not to hit a particular number. The way I see this problem is I look at it from the point of view of the person. Is there a good reason not to design a policy to provide a job opportunity for somebody who is really trying hard to find one and to find a good job opportunity? And to me, there is no good economic social moral reason not to do it when we actually have the means, the means to do it. So we're not looking for a society where everybody is a busy bee working. You know, there are good reasons why some people should go to school and stay at home and whatever they have chosen to do. They can do it with sort of a complex set of good social policies. But there are a lot of people for whom having a decent job is important and they shouldn't be just considered naturally unemployed and neglected because we kind of have accepted unemployment as something and avoidable, something natural. Earlier, I was glad when you pointed out that they were not just infrastructure jobs because I mean, obviously, we do need a massive infrastructure overhaul in this country. But like for myself, I am terrible with my hands. Like I can't even nail, you know, hammer a nail into a board without like breaking the board or bending the nail or something like that. So what kind of jobs would a job guarantee provide? What we want to do is take care of people, take care of our communities and take care of the environment. So we've got a lot of care needs from from after school activities for kids, from elder care, from meals on wheels, from attending to veterans who have returned home. There is a lot of care work. There are lots of gaps in that sphere. We also need to improve our communities. I mean, we would strive not just to clean them up and do all the monitoring for the pipes and fix the municipal water system, but also fix about public spaces, provide parks, provide gating rings and all of that. And the environment, of course, is the big one. I mean, just thinking about the environmental transformation that we need to undertake to deal with climate change, I think there's no shortage of work. We will probably run out of people rather than tasks to do. And I think this is the reason why the job guarantee has been called the single most crucial component of the job guarantee agenda. We are we're coming up on the end of our time, but I would like to ask you what it was that brought you to this line of work. I mean, I first started working on the job guarantee because I was really attracted to the macro benefits of this policy. What today we have is we basically use unemployment to stabilize the economy. And you hear when the Fed makes statements that we need to figure out what is the natural level of unemployment. Is it too low? Is it too high? Is it just right? And so to me, that didn't make sense, that we should be using unemployment to stabilize the economy when you could just use employment. So the job guarantee is essentially this policy that expands in recessions and contracts in expansions. And so we could do it better. And there are so many benefits, macro benefits. You know, you don't have this human yo-yo effect that we see in the unemployment rate, which is very volatile in the US. It oscillates so much. So that was the first thing that attracted me to this policy. But then the more I studied, the more I looked at actual policies that were implemented around this model, the benefits, it was the human state of this program that became very, very powerful and sort of giving me motivation to carry on. When you see how it actually plays out in the real world and has positive benefits. Exactly, how people respond, the material impact that it has on their lives, on their children. It is quite profound. And so I have looked for many arguments that would say, well, you know what, it's not a good idea to guarantee your violent employment opportunity for a person who needs it. And I have not yet found a single argument that is powerful enough to say we shouldn't go forward with this policy. Well, that's great. I'm so glad you're doing this work. Thank you for making the time. We really appreciate it. Thank you, Paul. I enjoy your podcast very much. And I'm glad to be on. Well, have a good day. Thanks. Thanks. Thank you. It may seem like the idea of guaranteed jobs came out of nowhere, but actually guaranteed jobs and pitchforks are linked throughout history. I'm Annie Fadley, professional policy nerd at Civic Ventures, and it's time for a little history. Let's go back to the industrial revolution in Europe. Before then, almost everyone was a farmer, but with factories came jobs that were more like we know them today with bosses and wages and schedules. At first, jobs were easy to get because so many laborers were needed. But as more and more people moved to urban areas, the concept of unemployment existed for the first time in human history. In France, around 1846, unemployment discontent was intensified by a food shortage. About a third of Paris was on social welfare, and the government tried to stop people from talking about it, which led to the revolution of 1848, the overthrow of the king, and the establishment of the French Second Republic. A provisional government was set up, and it was during this time that the idea of a guaranteed job was popularized. A socialist and historian called Louis Blanc is credited with inventing the concept of the right to work, and when he became a member of the provisional government after the revolution, he took his chance to make it happen. He proposed federally funded national workshops where workmen in each trade could be reliably employed. It was approved, but Louis Blanc's arch-enemy was put in charge of the workshops, and he sabotaged them. When it was announced that the super-popular workshops were closing, thousands of people rebelled in the June Days Uprising. More than 10,000 people were killed or injured by the National Guard, and Louis Blanc was exiled. That uprising was the end of the revolution of 1848 and snuffed out the promise of guaranteed jobs. But fast forward to the 1930s in the United States, the Great Depression. I ain't got no home, I'm just a-romin' round. Just a-wondering worker, I go from town to town... The conventional economic thinking at that time considered unemployment to be only a temporary state of being. Most people thought that the government should stay out of the market until it sorted itself out. But by 1933, unemployment had reached 25%, and President Franklin Roosevelt knew that he had to do something. I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people. And at the very heart of it was direct job creation. One of the New Deal's many job guarantee programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps, a voluntary public work relief program that employed 3 million men with jobs in forestry, soil erosion prevention, and flood control from 1933 to 1942. Programs just like that made the U.S. government the largest employer in the country for a decade, but they eventually fell victim to budget cuts. Since then, there have been a lot of efforts to more fully employ Americans, especially during wartime. And in 1978, President Carter signed the Humphrey Hawkins Full Employment Act, which, among other things, allows the government to create a reservoir of public employment if unemployment rises above 3%. And even though it obviously has, guaranteed job programs haven't been used to meet this need. Internationally, there's a few job programs here and there in Argentina, in India, and in South Africa. But here's the thing to take away from all of this. Job guarantees have been successful in the past, and they can be used again to encourage full participation in our economy. But typically, these programs have only appeared during times of extreme unrest. And maybe that's why this idea is gaining traction again today. That's your Quick History. Now back to the show. Our second guest is U.S. Representative Ro Khanna from California's 17th congressional district. That is, by the way, Silicon Valley. And he has this really interesting job opportunity bill that we're going to get to talk to him about. This is Ro. Hey, Ro. Nick Hanauer. Sorry, Nick. It's just been a crazy day. Yeah, I know. We've got all these votes on the NDAA. Yeah, no problem. Are you making progress? We did. I had a big amendment passed bipartisan on stopping any funding for any offensive war in Iran. And your 27 Republicans voted for it. So it was about 260 votes. So I am hopeful. Let's see what happens in the Senate. Oh, my gosh. Well, thank you for doing the thankless, awful work that you're doing. So thank you for what you're doing. Thank you for your incredible leadership. Your proposal is very intriguing and, you know, we think offers a lot. I appreciate it. It's a proposal that we worked with a number of economists on. And the idea is that job creation in this country has not been equal when you look at geography and it has not been equal when you look at race and it's not been equal when you look at economic class. And even Larry Summers recently wrote a big paper saying that while a free market economy without government interference has worked for many Americans, it actually has failed to create jobs in certain communities, whether that's rural America or communities of color, and that there is a role for active government intervention to help people get jobs and beyond the economic ladder towards put paying jobs in these communities. And that's particularly the case as we go through a technology revolution, which I know Nick, you've written a lot about that is changing the nature of work, that is changing the nature of the ability to unionize. There is an acute need to think about how we're going to create jobs. And so our proposal says, you know, one, we want to be creating jobs both in the private sector and the public sector. FDR's famous speech and when he talked about the right to work was not just the right to work for government. He actually talked about the right to work in mining, in farming, in private industry. And that the role the federal government can play is to help subsidize for up to 18 months a job and to also at the same time subsidize a credential in that area so that people can both work and get a skill. And you have generous wraparound services because we know that one barrier to employment is folks need to have the ability to write a resume and they need to be have housing and they need to be able to get a nutritious meal and they have to be integrated in society. So for 18 months, we would subsidize an individual to work in either the public sector or private sector to get the wraparound services and to get a credential with the idea that it is a transition to help them then be employable in the job market. And the bill, you know, originally some of the left was unhappy that it wasn't a full jobs bill and it didn't just give a job to everyone. But actually we're the only one right now who has an actual bill. So by default, it's the most progressive bill out there. A lot of progressives consider this bill to be a little moderate. Was that in the plan or do you disagree with that with that assessment? I agree with their critique, their vision in some of the left and some issues were aligned. But some of them want just the federal government should hire everyone. You should have a job guarantee for life, basically. And I don't think that's healthy. One, most people in this country still want to work in the private sector. And early Hochschild has a brilliant book, Strangers in Your Own Land, where she goes to communities that Trump carried and she says, well, why did the democratic message not resonate? And they said, well, we don't want government jobs. We want jobs in steel or manufacturing or in the private sector. Now, this is coming from someone who's dedicated his life to public service. I think government service is wonderful. I think people who work in the public sector, it's terrific. But I also believe that we have to give people the opportunity to work in the private sector. And the biggest complaint that the left had with the bill was that this would subsidize private sector jobs as well as government jobs. But there were a lot of safeguards on it. So it's not like Walmart could use these subsidies to just hire people at low level wages. I mean, it maximizes the amount of people you can use in a program to 20. So it's really geared towards small businesses or companies to use it for a small number of jobs. And again, it goes back to FDR's vision where he saw both the private sector and public sector is important. And this is why, you know, I call myself a progressive capitalist. The term Joseph Stiglitz coin. I believe in free enterprise. I believe in innovation and markets. But I believe they should be working for working Americans who have had huge productivity increases and aren't getting the benefits of the economy and that we need government intervention to give everyone a ladder to these jobs. And that I guess is the debate on with the further left is do you still believe in the private sector and free enterprise? And I do. Yeah, for sure. So can you explain to our listeners a little bit more about precisely what the bill will do? Sure. The bill will subsidize for up to 18 months an individual's entire salary in getting a job. So if you're working in a place, let's say in Chicago and you have been unemployed for a period of six months and you haven't been able to get a job, you can go and get qualify for a subsidy to get employment for up to 18 months. And you also would get a subsidy that would help you with all of the social services you may need to be able to succeed at the type of job that you would be hired into. And finally, the bill has a stipend for you to simultaneously after you get some hours in and your job to get a credential in whatever you may want if it's in a high growth area so that you become employable. And Georgetown did a study on this. They really did a whole academic study saying that this would significantly create almost two million jobs around the country. The cost is not astronomical. I mean, it's in the tens of billions, but we're not talking about something that's going to break the budget. Of course, it can continually be expanded as we prove success and that it would significantly lower poverty. Yeah, that's super cool. What do you think the the fairest criticism of the bill is? There could be a few fair criticism. So one is, is this subsidy going to be enough? Right. I mean, people who are unemployed in these areas, there are so many social issues that you have to address, whether it's housing, whether it's dealing with drug addiction or mental health issues, whether it's dealing with nutritional issues, psychological issues. Or is the subsidy really getting to what's going to be needed? Is 18 months enough? Is that enough of a time period? Are you asking people too much to do a job and also get a credential? And how do you how do you do that? And, you know, is this scale big enough? I mean, it's it's not a full federal jobs guarantee. And there are people, you know, I know, Nick, you've been such a leader on wages and getting wages up. The folks who argue for a full federal jobs guarantee with the federal government say that we need the public sector jobs to be paying 15, 17, 20 dollars an hour to put pressure on the private sector to compete. And this obviously doesn't have that aspect in as much of a sense. And so you would need other policies on minimum wage or things you've talked about to increase private sector wages. But you wouldn't have that impact of the public sector sort of being competitive. Right. One of the things that researchers seem to be finding now is that the idea of just giving out of work workers training is not as successful as it could be, that it doesn't do the job that that it should do. That it's always the thing that politicians suggest when the economy goes south is or when a factory closes is we'll just retrain retrain the workers. But that doesn't pan out in reality the way that it does in a speech. And something I find interesting about this is that it it seems to offer a little bit of latitude for people to do on the job training and kind of an apprenticeship. Is it is it designed for that kind of a thing to help people break into new industries? It is exactly. The difference is this is actually going to give you a job. So it's not just saying have training that leads to nowhere. It's saying you're going to be employed for up to 18 months. You're going to get on the job credential training. You're going to get a stipend to do additional courses if you if you need to. And I think in general in recessions, I mean, you look at Germany when we went through the Great Recession and they didn't have nearly the unemployment we did because they have policies that actually subsidize companies to keep people employed. And they basically pay the salaries and downturns or have huge incentives for companies to hire folks. And I think in some sense, this bill is modeled out of around ideas like that that have worked in other in other countries. And I agree with you completely. I think the job training, though important, has gotten such a bad name because what happened is we were subsidizing these jobs training programs. Partly, I think they were done often without any collaboration with the private sectors. I was down in Paintsville, Kentucky with and Hal Rogers is district big Republican and the community college is getting millions of dollars in jobs training. And they were literally I went to one of the classes and they were teaching kids how to replace hard drives. And how Roger said, look, this is crazy. We ought to be partnering with the private sector in some places and looking at app development or other things. And then they came up with a program where people were coal miners. Kids were going to be guaranteed a $40,000 job in in app development and we're going to be paid $400 a week for training. And the program was very successful. So I think job training, it's yes, we need new credentials, but a prerequisite to that has to be a paid job and paying people to get trained. The training challenge is a hard challenge because in a technological society that changes very quickly, by the time you have designed the training program, the industry has changed. So I mean, I'm sure that replacing the hard drive seemed like a great idea when somebody thought up it, thought it up a number of years ago. But it changes so fast that it's very hard to train people for specific skills that will last longer than one technology cycle. And that is just a hard problem. I mean, there's no way around it. There really is. You know, one thing that's pretty promising, we'll have to see, but there's a company in my district, People's Shore, is a nonprofit type approach. I know they may be a for profit company, but they did something in Clark still Mississippi, one of the poorest places in in America with African-American women, many single mothers. And they have them credentialed on robotics process automation, which is basically, you know, writing the some of the simple coding language that deals with chats online. And the fact that when you order from DoorDash, you're now often not talking to a person, but are talking to a bot. And it turns out that's a very simple to teach. And they were able to create 25 jobs paying not great, but starting at fifteen dollars an hour, going up to twenty dollars an hour. Called it the Emmett Till Center, because it's in the place where the famous case of Emmett Till was lynched to death in 1954 that led to the civil rights movement. And it's had this profound impact on the community in a very, very positive way. And the view is that, look, robotics process automation, maybe it's not a tenured job, but for the next five years, we're going to get tons of jobs in that. And they can all go offshore. We can do some things like this that are constructive in our communities. So I don't think they're perfect solutions. And I think technology continues to change. But I think there are many better solutions than the status quo. And we aren't being imaginative enough of what we can do. Yeah. How has the Job Opportunities for All Act been received in Congress? I guess where in the Schoolhouse Rock song are we about the bill becoming a law? We're far from it. Let's say Iran, which we just got into a law with twenty seven Republicans, got got through the House. You know, I mean, that's at stage eight. Let's say we're at stage one or two. And the reason for that is we have a lot more work to do for us within our own Democratic colleagues to say that this is needed. People say, well, we're at three point eight percent or whatever, three point six percent unemployment. I say, yeah, but people don't have stable, good paying jobs that are pathways to a career. And you still have a lot of geographic disparity in that. So I think people like you and your writing in your advocacy can make a big difference. And then we need some of our presidential candidates to speak about it. I mean, one of the things that has been shocking to me, and I don't know if you feel about that, is the lack of conversation in the first debate about jobs, about good jobs, about economic issues. I feel like, you know, we can't just cede that to Donald Trump. And I think that his argument the economy is doing well is sufficient. So we need our presidential candidates talking about it. We need more conversation about it. We need more grassroots mobilization around it. Yeah, I think you're right. I think you're right. So what's next? The good news is we had a very positive report by Georgetown, by some of the leading think tanks that we're going to circulate to colleagues to make sure that we're getting as many co-sponsors on this bill. You know, I don't want to have a monopoly on having the only bill out there. I welcome actually just out of intellectual dissent and debate to have other members of Congress and senators introduce bills. I mean, we've got 20 health care bills in this Congress. We've got numerous bills on minimum wage, earned income tax credit. I'd love to have two, three other good bills. I mean, people, I think it was a fad in a moment where people all talked about jobs guarantees and then, you know, some people legitimately had criticisms with mine. But we actually did the work to get a final bill out. And I think we need more of those bills. We need to build then hopefully get more co-sponsors. And the magic number is usually 100. When you get to about 100 co-sponsors, then the leadership starts to take it seriously and you can move. And then we need a Democratic president, although I think on a more modest bill, probably even more modest than mine, you could arguably even get some Republican support. Right. A question we ask everybody on this show. Why do you do this work? Well, for two reasons. I am the son of immigrants and I my parents came from India. My father was a chemical engineer. My mom was a substitute school teacher. I went to public school to get a loan to get to go to some of the great universities. And I now represent arguably one of the most economically successful places in the world. I believe it's an extraordinary country. I believe there's a kind country, a decent country. I grew up in a place that was 99 percent white. It was one of the only Indian kids going to school in a class of 800. And so I finally believe in the decency of this country. But I I think that the country is being ripped apart by people who aren't talking about the real issues, which is that we're going through a technology revolution and there have been people left behind. And I fundamentally have a hope that if we can extend economic opportunity to people left out, then we will appeal to the better angels of this country again. And the type of country that I grew up in, which was very inclusive and wanted people to achieve their dreams. And then on a very personal level, my grandfather spent four years in jail with Gandhi in the 1940s. Really? In India's independence. No kidding. You know, I've been very, very passionate about human rights from a very young age. So he what did your grandfather do? He was in India's actually first parliament. But he was for 15 years, he was involved in India's freedom movement and he was in jail from 1941 to 1945, the quit India movement with part of Gandhi's independence movement. He worked with Lala Rajpat Rayi was one of the leaders of the Indian independence movement. And, you know, I have great admiration for him. That's cool. I mean, not that he went to jail, but, you know, like this link to history is pretty amazing. That is my life. I say to people, he's on my Wikipedia page and he's got a page of his and I say, you know, what he did is such an extraordinary thing, the risks he took that anytime I have a hard vote or something here, I think it's sales and comparison to what he did. And sales and comparison to a lot of my colleagues, you know, whatever you think of Congress, you know, people like John Lewis and was beaten on the Edmund Pettus Bridge and others. I mean, it's a I'm always mindful of what the previous generations have done to get us to this point. Yeah. Well, thank you so much for talking to us. It's been a fantastic conversation. That last little bit of history was really pretty cool. Anyway, well, best of luck on all this stuff and we will be definitely rooting for this. It's a really cool idea. And I appreciate Nick and I really appreciate all your advocacy. And I know you've come to the Hill often and you're writing and to have someone like you has the credibility with Americans, given your own story and economic. Success talking about equity and talking about getting people a fair shot. I mean, you're having a profound impact and I really appreciate all you're doing. Well, that's very kind of you. OK, then we'll talk soon. Hope you hope to see you soon. Take care. Bye. So we've done two episodes about two very different theories of how to operate the economy and they both have their their positives and their negatives. Nick, where do you come down? Which one do you prefer if you had to choose one? Yeah, well, I have never been and continue to not be a huge fan of UBI, universal basic income. You know, but I am a big fan of the idea of a universal basic job because for some hundreds of billions of dollars, which sounds like a lot, but really isn't in the context of the full, full budget, you could make a you could take a huge dent, make a huge dent, rather. In unemployment and voluntary unemployment and make people productive and generate a lot of value in the economy and simultaneously train people for new stuff that they hadn't done before and all sorts of benefits like that. And I think I think that the universal basic job, if looked at in the right way, actually would pay for itself. It would literally pay for itself. And so I find that idea to be much more promising. It just seems like a much more efficient and effective way to run the economy, a thing which is more consonant with, I think, what people are like and what they need and more directly fulfills the needs of the country, too, because, as I said before, there's a we got a lot of stuff to do. You know, like there's a lot of stuff that needs doing. And if people are not employed in the private sector, then, you know, by golly, let's let's employ them in the public sector to get it done. There's nothing about that that won't make our country stronger and better off. Yeah, I'm definitely more of a proponent of guaranteed jobs than of a UBI, because partly, as you mentioned, I think the training is really important. And I think that the guarantee jobs are a great way to train people for a new line of work, because at least for me, I learn by doing things. Yes. And also, I do believe I know that a lot of people sort of roll their eyes when politicians talk about the dignity of work and things like that. But, you know, I speak to a lot of people who want to be writers, you know, be the journalism students or aspiring novelists or whatever. And I always say that nothing is more inspiring than a deadline. And, you know, and, you know, you can you can noodle on a novel for years and years. But when you finally get that we need this done by this date, that's that's the muse. That's the inspiration. Right. And I think that applies to to life and to learning and to work. You know, there's something very important about keeping folks sort of in the flow of things. Yeah. Right. Like you don't want people at home. You want them out and about. And the truth is that, you know, most people get jobs and get experience and get advanced in their life through a network of relationships, not through the newspaper rads or whatever. Right. And so the thing about a jobs guarantee is it keeps you plugged into the world in a way that allows a capable person to build relationships with ideas. And dealing with new people and new networks of opportunity. And and from that, you can build a life around new things. But, you know, a stipend, which may allow you to subsist, but keeps you at home, isn't as good as that. Right. Right. You know, it isn't as good as being plugged into a world of work and opportunity and creativity and stuff that's just happening. Yeah. So I mean, I have I have some concerns. There are obviously a lot of particulars to deal with. But one thing for me is I'm I'm a little concerned about there being a two tier system where you have people who are employed by the public sector and people who are employed by the private sector. And I mean, I think most people who've worked crappy jobs can tell you that it is exhausting enough that you have to go home and like applying for work is almost like a whole other part time job. Right. So so if if somebody is in the public sector and they want to bring their their talents to the to the private sector, I could see there being some barriers. If there is some sort of a flow back and forth between the two, I think that could be beneficial for everyone. Yeah, for sure. You don't want to just trap people in one specific line of work. That's almost what we're trying to fight with this. Yeah, for sure. But in any case, two really interesting and important policy ideas to explore. And, you know, I'm sure there will be much much said about these things in the future. Absolutely. So in the next episode of Pitchfork Economics, we're going to do something which I'm really excited about. We're going to unpack the methodology that economists use to judge whether the minimum wage is killing jobs or not. And it's super important to understand that because what they're not doing is just counting up the number of jobs in a particular economy after the minimum wage is raised. It's far more complicated than that. And it can be gamed. And we're going to explore that. Pitchfork Economics is produced by Civic Ventures. The magic happens in Seattle in partnership with large media. That's L-A-R-J Media and the Young Turks Network. Find us on Twitter and Facebook at Civic Action. Follow our writing on Medium at Civic Skunkworks and peek behind the podcast scenes on Instagram at Pitchfork Economics. And one more. You should definitely follow Nick on Twitter at Nick Hanauer. As always, a big thank you to our guests and thanks to you for listening from our team at Civic Ventures. Nick Hanauer, Zach Silk, Jasmine Weaver, Jessen Farrell, Stephanie Ervin, David Goldstein, Paul Constant, Stephen Palini and Annie Fabley. See you next week.