 As politicians take a break from Parliament, we look at four of them who have had quite the year so far. I'm Jessica Elgott, Chief Political Correspondent for The Guardian, and this is Politics Weekly. For the next four weeks in our special summer series, we're going to look at some of the men and women behind the politician. How did they rise to the top? What makes them tick? And where might they go next? First up, Mr Deputy Speaker, there remains a big task ahead of us to restore our freedoms. Freedoms that save for the greatest of circumstances no government should ever wish to curtail. Sajid Javid was appointed Secretary of State for Health and Social Care in June when Matt Hancock was forced to rather spectacularly resign after breaking social distancing guidance while having an affair. It's been a huge honour to serve as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Whilst I was very pleased that the Prime Minister wanted to reappoint me, I was unable to accept the conditions that he had attached. So I felt I was left with no option other than to resign. Javid himself knows all too well what it's like to go through a high-profile resignation. He quit as Chancellor of Johnson's government in the spring of 2020 after refusing the Prime Minister and Dominic Cummings request to sack all of his advisers. So who is Sajid Javid? To figure that out, I spoke to Salma Shah, who was Javid's special adviser when he was home secretary, the Conservative MP Robert Halphon, who was a long-time pal of Javid since they went to university together, and Katie Balls, the Deputy Political Editor of The Spectator. Thank you all so much for coming on. Salma, let's start with you. Sum up Sajid Javid for us. What's he like in three words? Or maybe a few more if you like. I'm not sure I could do it in three words. I think he is a practical, straightforward and hard-working politician, which sounds incredibly boring and sounds like I am just putting a spin on it. But if you ask my honest opinion, the best summary of him is that. Rob, maybe you can tell us a little bit about what he was... You knew him when he was much younger and he's a student. Tell us a bit about him then. Yes, I first met Sajid when we were at Exeter University and he's an incredibly decent human being, a huge work ethic, massively motivated. I mean, he just wanted to do as well as he could at university, love politics, as you can imagine. We were all involved in the Exeter University Conservative Association and very, very active at the time. But he was very jolly and very funny. And sometimes we don't often see that side of him in public, but he's actually a very funny man. I'm sure Salma would vouch for that as well. He is very funny behind the scenes and he has quite a juvenile sense of humor as well. But he... It's interesting that you say that Rob, because most people never ever see that side of him, because I think he has sort of a professional sort of image and he also has a private one. So I think you're right there. He doesn't really share that side of him that much. Katie, what do we know about Sajid Java's early political influences and how, you know, what kind of drives him now? We know that he is a thatcherite. We also know, I think, when he's been asked, you know, what's your favorite reading? He talks about Anne Rand, which I think gives you an indicator of where he sits on the Tory spectrum. And I think that he's someone who has come into government and into politics believing in a slim-down state. But obviously, as you get into these roles, and particularly in his current non-House secretary, things start to get a bit more complicated. I think the Ayn Rand thing is often people look at Ayn Rand just because she... I have a picture of Ayn Rand in my office. We were all influenced by Ayn Rand at Existo. And there were lots of concerned students at the time. But there was another side to Ayn Rand, which wasn't just about the minimalist state. It was actually about refusing to give in to lazy consensus, having an incredible work ethic, working hard. And, you know, you can achieve anything if you put your mind to it and didn't give in to, you know, as I say, the consensus at the time. And the fountainhead, which is about an architect, which he loves and quotes from, that is very much what that book is about. You can do anything, whatever your background, wherever you come from. I've had a lot of arguments with him about Ayn Rand, who I think is actually an appalling writer. And I just don't agree with him much of the philosophy. And he used to get very defensive about it. And I think it's the reason that people... You know, people talk about his backstory, you know, and it's sort of like, oh, lovely, and it's presented. But that's an experience that he's lived. And I think when you have been the underdog and there have been so many... Well, actually, a complete lack of expectation for what you might do or what you might achieve, then, you know, that kind of message, I think, does really resonate with people like Sajid, who really had to fight for absolutely everything in their lives, from, you know, their political career to even the fact that he's a success, the fact that he went to university, you know, at the time that he did. I would just also say that in terms of his political career, he's never actually been this deconstructed Thatcherite. And I think people paint him in a way that doesn't actually look at the actions that he's taken as a government minister, which in lots of cases have been quite interventionist. So things like bringing in the apprenticeship levy, things like introducing the national living wage, he did all of that, which you would argue and was argued at the time was not conservative. And I think very sensibly, he always said that, you know, it's also not conservative for the state to subsidize wages when business should be doing that. So I think when you scratch the surface a little bit, it's not quite as easy as sort of, you know, painting him on the very right of the party and being very economically dry. What I would say is that I think at the time, we just believed that if you had enough economic capital, everything else, we believed in the trickle down effect, everything else would transform. And I think what the difference now is that Sajid, people like myself believe that you have to have social capital and economic capital hand in hand. And so I mentioned the apprenticeship scheme, I think, you know, the fact that Sajid went to an FE college was fundamental, I think, apart from Gavin Williamson, he's the only cabinet minister who has gone to an FE college, although someone told me recently that Hancock attended one briefly. But you know, that that is manifested, he has always fought for more funding for further education. So whilst the establishment and all the kind of university people in the House of Lords were always battling for more university and research money, Sajid always wanted the balance to go back to further education, because he understood how important it was, particularly for pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds. Katie, he's in this cabinet, he's a bit of an outsider in terms of his background, you know, Rob kind of touched on that a bit. He famously grew up in, it was described as one of the dangerous, one of the poorest streets in the country. How much do you think that informs his politics now? He's obviously then had a very different background in the route to being in politics, working in banking. But how much do you think that early experience has informed his politics? I think as Rob and Salma touched on, you have started to have it in terms of his early politics, how he saw the world. You also have someone in terms of, I think, across the spectrum, seen as a strong advocate of social mobility. I think that's something that really drives him. And I think that's clearly linked to his own upbringing and the fact that he wants to have that opportunity for everyone. And I think you can see that in the various briefs he's had. I think in terms of, I suppose, his cabinet colleagues, as Rob was saying, you look at educational backgrounds. I think that in that cabinet, if you think about having a senior cabinet minister who is an ethnic minority, the others, who look at Quasi-Quattan, Rishi Sunak, had pretty wealthy up rooms. And I think Sajid Javid stands out for the fact that he didn't have that. And it means you have a different voice around the table when you're thinking about how policy decisions affect things. How much do you think, I guess there's a question to all of you, that Sajid's faith and background and position as an, he's been a trailblazer as an ethnic minority, MP in various positions, including his home secretary. How much do you think that drives him, motivates him, or do you think it's a sort of lesser consideration for him? I think he's incredibly driven. In terms of his background, I think he rather sees him as more of a role model, the fact that he can achieve these things and have the success and change things in our country for the better. It's more of a role model that, yes, other people from disadvantaged backgrounds can do the same. He was prepared, wasn't he, Katie, to kind of take on Trump about the Muslim ban. He spoke out about that one of the sort of few cabinet ministers to really condemn it. There clearly are things that he is prepared to speak out on that kind of touch a core in him. Yeah, I think we can see in his interventions that he is willing to talk up on various issues, such as in the case of Trump, but issues affecting ethnic minorities, issues on racism, I think at times when other ministers can slightly shy away from it or avoid the difficult conversation. I think Sadrajala has a confidence there. I also think we saw it a bit in the Windrush scandal because he was brought in. I think we can see a history in Sadrajala's cabinet positions of firefighting effectively. He often comes in when there's just been a problem in the department or set in the midst of one. Amber Rudd had obviously left in the wake of the Windrush scandal. I think that the rhetoric from Sadrajabad had more impact than had it been another minister. I think that the fact that he was condemning some of the things that happened, I just think it was a change of tune in terms of the messaging. I think you could just see that I think he has an authority on issues, which means he can talk about them in a way that some of his colleagues struggle to. Sam, do you want to talk a little bit about time in the home office and what he felt like he achieved there or didn't achieve there? It was a very disrupted time in politics, wasn't it? It was just such a chaotic period over Brexit. Sadraj was seen as replacing Amber Rudd, who'd very much not been a Eurosceptic. He had had Eurosceptic instincts, but eventually backed remain possibly out of loyalty to George Osborne. What was it like during that period? I think if you go right back to the result of the referendum campaign, people often say, oh, he took a careerist decision, et cetera. Well, you forget that he was business secretary at the time and day after day, businesses were trooping in from up and down the country, lots of different sectors saying, this is how Brexit will impact us negatively. That is going to have an impact on the way that you think about Brexit, even if you are naturally Eurosceptic. I think it's a bit of an old wives tale. It's part of the Westminster myth that, oh, it was just about political maneuvering. It really wasn't for him. When he went to the home office post Windrush, it was a completely different dynamic and something that we hadn't really encountered for the two years previously while these negotiations were going on. In the meantime, we'd obviously had the 2017 election campaign, which at the time, it was being briefed that he was going to be sacked from cabinet. We had a really, really tumultuous time in the lead up to going to the home office. I think what he did really successfully there was he got on with creating the basis for which the home office is now functioning in terms of the immigration white paper, designing a new system in terms of getting the EU settlement scheme up and running. These are not the types of things that you're going to get massive credit for. These are not headline grabbing reforms, but they are things that actually make the running of government much more efficient that meant that actually there was a smoother transition once we finally got Brexit done, albeit not perfect at the border at the moment. He really did do what he could to make that operation effective. Casey, how much do you think he really involved himself in that, in those, there were people who were really key players, weren't there, in that time in the lead up, all those different meaningful votes in the run up to Theresa May's resignation? How much was Sajid Javid a key part of that manoeuvring? I think it's an interesting one because Sajid Javid obviously back remain and I think that that has not been forgotten to this day. I'm sure as I'm panellists say, people can over focus on it because Sajid Javid has some Euro sceptic tendencies. I think it meant when it came to those debates, you had certain cabinet ministers who were in very clear camps on both sides. You knew which way they would push in terms of these debates, once in terms of a resignation watch. And then I think figures such as Sajid Javid were seen more as the pragmatists and almost bellwethers in terms of where they were going, it gave you an indication of where the general mood was on these because it was harder to predict. Rob, he ran for leader when Theresa May resigned. Boris was obviously the massive front runner in that, although it was clearly a very significant stop Boris wing of the party. How did Javid feel about that? Did he feel like he was in the stop Boris camp? Was he running to get a good cabinet position? Did he genuinely think he could win? Well, I co-chaired his parliamentary campaign with Matthew Elliott and we got to the quarter finals. We did pretty well, but he wanted to win. It was nothing to do with Boris or whoever was favourite at the time. Initially, people thought it was going to be, a lot of people thought it was going to be Dominic Raab and Dominic Raab was knocked out before Sajid was, but he believed that he could be a leader. And if it had gone to the country, as in the party in the country, he felt that he had a good chance. But I think it wasn't about cabinet positioning at all. I really felt that he believed that he had a chance. But of course, the Brexit thing didn't help. I mean, I remember some concerns of MPs saying to him and to me that no way because of his position on Brexit. But I do think a lot of that has died out now because I remember one of the MPs was particularly vexed about the Brexit issue and about Sajid's position and said he would never vote for Sajid in a million years. Subsequently wrote Sajid a letter saying that he was delighted that he was back in the cabinet. So I really think that that is not an issue in the way that it was in the past. I think that leadership campaign was interesting, though, because there was quite a lot of hype about Sajid Javed in advance. I think as Rob says, Boris Johnson only really became the proper favourite once he realised he could get from parliamentary stages. There was some sense that actually does he have the MPs to back him. It seems strange now, but Altamit did it for like a done deal. I think what was I think frustrating for Alice with Sajid Javed was it just took a long time for that campaign to get off the ground. It really is, even though he did finish, you know, very far along, he did get far along. I remember it being quite a slow starting campaign. I think it struggled to have much comfort or make noise because there were so many horses in this race. And I think that it did expose, I think one of Sajid Javed's weaknesses in the sense that I think he is regarded by his colleagues as incredibly competent and decent. But as a communicator, he can struggle to articulate or, you know, get out his vision. I think we saw that in that campaign, at least in the beginning. Katie, maybe you can sum up for us what happened next, you know, as Chancellor. It was certainly a short-lived tenure in the innards of, again, a pretty chaotic period of time while trying to force through the Brexit vote, you know, Parliament being paroled, judicial review, and then, you know, a massive fallout with Dominic Cummings. This is at the peak of Dominic Cummings' power really in number 10. So it was always framed around the Vote Leave team and Sajid Javed run really empty personal with the Prime Minister, who he's always got on well with. And there have been various briefings about, you know, where Sajid's team behind various things and likewise where the other side hit him back. And it got to the day. And I think everyone just presumed the first bit of the reshuffered be the quickest, you know, confirming everyone's staying in great offices of state. You're waiting for an update, takes a bit longer. Oh, I'm sure it's nothing. Takes a little bit longer. And then you start to realise, actually, we have a problem because we've had no news and people are in 10 Downing Street for these meetings. And then it emerges that Sajid Javed has resigned. He has left his role as Chancellor. And this was because he was ultimately presented with a choice that wasn't really a choice. Number 10 had effectively said he could stay on his Chancellor, but only if he got rid of me, his entire team of special advisors. And he decided that was not something he could live with or go with. So he chose to go and and really soon it was brought in. But I think to lose a Chancellor is a dramatic move of any Prime Minister. And from the moment on, there was a question about whether there was a way back because Sajid Javed had done what many wouldn't do and did. And after that, he did this in his quakes where he was standing up to Dominic Cummings and he was being critical of Dominic Cummings. And while there are lots of Tory MPs and ministers who are now, back then it was something that was not done in slightest. Well, here you go. I mean, this is the classic example. If you want to talk about Ayn Rand and the Fountainhead and about Sajid being the fighter, he was the only one that stood up for what he actually thought was right and stood up to the Prime Minister and said what he thought. And, you know, given that he's back in the Cabinet and in the most prominent position there is, particularly during a pandemic as Health Secretary, I'd say Dominic Cummings was the one that underestimated him and actually given his life experience and given the fact that he's a fighter, you know, blaggers like Cummings really should think again before taking them on. It was quite extraordinary because straight after the 2019 election, Sajid had his 50th birthday. Boris and Carrie were there. I was there. And it was a great event. And then a few weeks later, Sajid had given up one of the most important posts in government. Who would do that? I think it was one of his great, great moments and showed that he wanted to be someone of integrity and he was not going to be a unit Chancellor and not be threatened by certain individuals, as Selma has just highlighted. He's back in the Cabinet now having spent quite a, you know, there's been ex-Cabinet ministers who've spoken out at critical junctures to criticise what the government's doing. I'm sort of thinking more about people like Jeremy Hunt. He's been pretty loyal. He was clearly waiting for a chance to return, especially after Cummings' departure. Do you think it's fair to talk about him as being more libertarian than Hancock, more keen to open up? And does that open up problems for him later down the line? I don't think that's a libertarian instinct at all. I think this is, and I think you've been quite clear on this, that actually as Health Secretary, he cannot just be the Health Secretary for COVID. And when you look at the waiting list situation and you look at those people who are not taking routine appointments for things that could end up being very, very serious, I think it's not really a freedom argument. It is a, we have to do a risk assessment of the risk of COVID versus other health considerations and also economic considerations, which is why this kind of constant loop into lockdown and out of lockdown, he understands the impact that that's going to have, not just kind of like immediately on the restaurant sector, but actually what it's doing, what the uncertainty is doing long-term to the economic picture of the UK. So I don't think it's fair to characterise him in a way that's kind of, and it's very extreme would be sort of like the Lawrence Foxes and the anti-maskers and the anti-vaxxers. And I think people conflate these things without really looking at the nuance of it. Yeah, I think you're looking at the scale and going to the doves versus walks, which obviously can be a bit of a clumsy way of defining this, but I do think it's fair to say that if you look at Sajid Javid's interventions from the backbenchers during that time out between Chancellor and Health Secretary, he does fit into the more the hawkish end of the party. But as Salma points out, that's not a Lawrence Fox place. I think that's the probably quite centre opinion of in terms of the Tory parliamentary party, in terms of getting back to a place of personal responsibility. But I also think when people look at some of those comments, like for example, he said, you know, run the economy hot in terms of lifting restrictions at one point. He was talking about this thinking about the economy as a former chancellor. And obviously now he's Health Secretary, he's looking at things from a public health perspective. So you are, you know, having to make different calculations. So I don't think we can quite take that as his immediate view now. And I think for all the talk about, you know, personal responsibility and getting rid of restrictions, we're already seeing almost as he, you know, gets settled into the job, more caution than I think perhaps the media was when he very first came in with the expectation. I think we are seeing a slightly different version of him now that he is in that role. Final question, Rob, does he still have his own being PM? I think he's delighted to be able to. There are any circumstances that he can envisage doing anything else. Sal Masha, Katie Bowles and Robert Halphon, thanks ever so much for joining me. Thanks, Jess. Thank you. Thank you very much. Just lovely to be on. And that's all from us this week. Make sure to look out for next week's episode when Rowena Mason looks back at the political career so far as the Labour Party's deputy leader, Angela Rayner. But for now, I want to thank my guests, Katie Bowles, Sal Masha and Robert Halphon. The producers are Yoling Gafan and Danielle Stevens. And I'm Jessica Elgott. Enjoy your summer. And thanks for listening.