 This is The Guardian. Just over 40 years ago, that great Tory goddess Margaret Thatcher famously said that she wasn't for turning. Something that's come back to bite Liz Trust this week. So I am being very clear that we will not be going ahead with the regional pay boards. A major U-turn then. With national pay boards. Is this in Liz Trust U-turn? In fact, Trust and Rishi Sunak have both made U-turns this week. Will that make any difference to their chances? And has Keir Starmer jumped aboard the U-turn fairground ride? The Labour Party in opposition needs to be the Labour Party in power and a government doesn't go on picket lines. Despite his stance banning Labour from benches from attending picket lines, the shadow levelling up minister Lisa Nandy was on one in Wigan on Monday. Starmer has been boosted recently by his party's poll leads, but some of us still wonder why he seems to be lacking clout and a vision for the country. I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Weekly UK for The Guardian. Joining me today are The Guardian's chief political correspondent Jessica Elgott and the former Conservative MP and Chief of Staff to Theresa May when she was the Prime Minister, Gavin Barwell, who now sits in the House of Lords for his sins. Hello to you both. Hi. Hello. Now, just before we started this, we were going to talk about Jerry Halliwell posing with the Dean Dorris and Liz Trust, but we're not anymore because Jess said something really interesting to me, which was that traditionally this period of the summer is known as the Silly Season because political news all dries up and the newspapers fill up with ephemera and Jess said we don't have the Silly Season anymore, which I didn't know. So can you explain why August is no longer the Silly Season? This is the Silly Season because news stories are all about turtles in the Thames and people sitting in baths of baked beans and stuff ordinarily, but not anymore. I say that in a kind of flip away, but like mainly because I've never experienced a Silly Season in my entire time of political reporting because there's always been like major existential crises going on in British politics ever since I joined the lobby, which was in mid 2016. So obviously, that August that I first was in political reporting, there was quite a lot going on in 2016. We just had a new prime minister. We had a Labour Leadership Contest because Owen Smith was, remember him, challenging Jeremy Corbyn. Both parties were in a state of intense turmoil. And then the following year was 2017 when there was also quite a lot going on in the fallout from the general election in 2018. We were definitely in the midst of the Brexit chaos. Checkers was taking place during that time. Gavin will remember it well. And 2019 in August, we were having a Tory Leadership Contest. So we just haven't had a break in August. It doesn't exist anymore. It's a dangerous season politically, Gavin, isn't it? All kinds of crazy stuff can happen. Yeah, I mean, there is a sort of opposite way of looking at the phenomenon just as described, which is actually Silly Season in British politics has been extended to the full 52 weeks of the year. It's now just encompasses the whole thing. Right. Talking of which, there's arguably a perfect case in point playing out in front of us. Today, we will be talking inevitably about the Tory Leadership Contest and the two candidates, the U-turns, both of them have performed in the last few days and what the contest may or may not say about the Conservative Party's talent pool. We will then go to the other side of the House of Commons and talk about the Labour Party. There have been lots of no's from Keir Starmer over the summer, but not many yes's. And I suppose people like me still are wondering what on earth he stands for. Let's talk about the Conservative Party in the leadership contest to start with. Last Tuesday, the Treasury Secretary and Liz Truss-Backer Simon Clarke tweeted about Rishi Sunak's in quote, screeching U-turn over tax cuts. He tweeted U-turn if you want to, the ladies not for turning, another one of those slightly flimsy tributes to Margaret Thatcher. Now, he has since ended up with a little bit of egg on his face, to say the least, because Liz Truss performed a screeching U-turn in a matter of minutes, it felt like this week, having floated, I think that's being polite, this idea of regional variations in public sector pay, which would mean people who worked in the public sector getting paid less in in quotes, poorer areas. Within a matter of hours, she retracted that. Jess, talk us through what happened and whether you were surprised by the rapidity of that U-turn. To me, because we got the press release maybe on the, you know, the morning before, and then it's embargoed until a bit late with the day. As soon as I saw this, I thought, this is definitely not going to last. Not only because, I mean, initially the reason I thought that's because the sums in it were completely mad. I mean, there was, so it was saying that there was a part of it that said you were going to save 8.8 billion from the civil service pay bill. When you ring the Institute for Government, they say, well, hang on a minute, the civil service pay bill in total is 9 billion. So I'm not sure how you're going to save that much money. And there was also another sum in it, which talked about getting rid of moving so many people out so you could get rid of London weighting, which said it was to serve 533 million pounds. But then if you divided that by the number of people on London weighting, it said that London weighting was 25 grand a year. And I was about to jack it all in and become a civil servant and get my 25 grand a year. So there was so much in it that was clearly incorrect and had to be corrected because much of the policy had been lifted totally wholesale from a press release by the taxpayers' alliance. And that press release made it very clear that it applied to the whole public sector. And so you sort of saw the cogs whirring behind the scenes that they were not going to be able to say they could save this amount of money unless they applied it to the whole public sector. So my personal views behind the scenes was all kind of a mistake and are made to kind of cover up the fact that they couldn't make the sums work. But then of course, it turned into a total political car crash when Ben Houch and the Tees Valley mayor said, well, what this would mean if you extend it to the whole public sector is cutting the pay of nurses and policemen. And you suddenly had reams of Tory MPs, not just from the north of England, by the way, but from people in the southwest saying that this is going to make a massive difference to my constituents. It's the kind of thing that could cost us a general election if it had taken hold in the middle of a general election campaign. And so obviously at that point, it's going to be ditched. You just know you can smell it coming a mile off. And I was surprised it lasted as long as it did. Gavin, I always wonder how much these sort of U-turns registered. You've got experience of some of this. Theresa May famously had to U-turn on her own manifesto plan on social care. And she then told us that nothing had changed even though it had. How important are these things and how should they be handled? So I think what's more damaging is the attempt to deny there's been a U-turn. You know, if you think about Theresa in the election, that phrase is the thing that everyone remembers. And this is campaign, I can't remember the exact phrase they use, but you know, that people have been taking out context or... She said she'd be misrepresented. So that's the thing that actually attracts all the mockery. I think with the actual U-turns, if you do too many of them, then you get a reputation as not being competent. You know, when Theresa actually appointed me as chief of staff, I went down to see her and as a kind of icebreaker, I drew up this list of three things she'd done that I really admired and three things she'd done that I thought she'd got completely wrong. And I included this as one of the three she'd got completely wrong. And she sort of said to me, well, what would you have said? It was you on the platform having to answer that question. And I said, well, I'd have really leaned into it. I'd have said, this is a massive U-turn. I got this thing wrong and we've completely shifted the policy. And if you vote for me in the general election, then you can know that I'm, unlike most politicians, I'm going to be a prime minister. If I get something wrong, I'm not going to plow on regardless. I'm going to own up and I'm going to put it right. So I think you can't do that all the time. But every now and then, if you do get something wrong, leaning into it and owning up to it is better than trying to pretend that there hasn't been a U-turn. But they very rarely do that. Mostly it's just obfuscation and denial and it looks absurd. Yeah. And that's, you know, I think it's the culture we've got to in politics where, you know, certainly with Boris Johnson as prime minister, there's almost like I never admit you misspoke, you got anything wrong, just denied, denied, denied. But the further I get away from politics, the more I just see the way ordinary people react when they see politicians on TV or hear them on the radio saying things which are demonstrably untrue. It doesn't do anything to enhance their credibility. So we just hear the fingers down a blackboard sound of Liz Trust claiming that it had been misrepresented. Let's hear a bit of that. My policy on this has been misrepresented. There was never any intention to affect teachers and nurses. But I don't want to worry people. I don't want people to be concerned. So I'm being very clear that we will not be going ahead with the regional pay boards. A major U-turn then. With national pay boards. Is this a Liz Trust U-turn? Right, let's move on to Rishi Sunak. Rishi Sunak's U-turn was on tax cuts scrapping VAT on energy bills and he said he would lower the income tax rate to 16 percent having been missed the tax cuts are the last thing we should be embracing. I have to qualify that slightly because as far as I understand it, that rather fantastical cut in income tax rates, he's not, if he were to become Prime Minister, he's not planning that for a fair old while. But nonetheless, this is how Rishi Sunak defended his position on not cutting during the TV debates. Liz, we have to be honest. We have to be honest. But borrowing your way out of inflation isn't a plan. It's a fairy tale. I think it is wrong to put taxes up because that is what we're talking about. Right, now he's now got fairy tales of his own. Gavin, I wonder, two U-turns, one on either side. Who comes out of this worse? I think that the trust one is more damaging in terms of the real world impact it would have had on thousands of MPs constituents. Yeah, people would have worried about this, right? Yeah. I think with Rishi, you can slightly defend it and say what he's talking about, a temporary thing that's helped during the cost of living crisis rather than a long term shift in policy. But the reality is it is a change and the change has been pushed on him because he's behind in the race and trust has made the running on tax cutting and he's felt the need to respond to it. Do you think, Jess, that Sunak is starting to look a bit desperate? I mean, he's started to look like somebody he obviously isn't really. And that's happened in short order. I mean, the Sunak tax cuts, I'm sort of less excited about them being a U-turn, given that they go on till 2029, when no one has got any idea what the fiscal situation is going to be like at all. The VAT and energy bills are sort of more egregious in my eyes because of so much briefing we've had, when that was a labor policy, so much briefing we had about the Treasury, about how that was bad, it would hit the wrong people, we want to target it differently and then just come out and announce it as if it's your policy you thought of, I thought was pretty hilarious. For Sunak, what he's had to do more obviously is like come out with loads and loads of cultural stuff, you know, on statues or on, you know, deporting people who've stolen a packet of crisps or which seems to be ticking lots of the kind of Tory membership boxes, including on serious issues like grooming gangs and Islamist extremism, which are, you know, obviously very serious issues, but also ones that feel designed to kind of put him in a particular place in the political sphere. But it's not working Gavin, I read today now how much importance one should attach to these polls of Tory members, I don't know, but the Times for example today says that Liz Truss is on 60%. I mean it's now almost a complete certainty that she's going to be the Prime Minister, isn't it? It feels like that, I mean I think the pollsters would tell you that polling Conservative Party members is a much harder thing to do technically than polling the General electorate because it's a smaller subset of people, they're harder to find and we don't know exactly what the demographic profile of the Conservative Party's membership is, so it's hard to make sure that you've got a representative sample, but the scale of the lead would suggest that she's a sort of very strong favourite to win. Look, to me John, the most interesting thing in that poll wasn't the headline figure, it was the data underneath that showed that a majority of Conservative Party members don't actually think there should be a leadership election because they think Boris Johnson shouldn't have been forced to resign, and I think that's the fundamental problem that Rishi has got. He's trying to win an election among an electorate that didn't want Boris Johnson forced out. And in fact you can sense this in some of the commentary around the leadership election, so I went to my local Lidl 20 minutes ago, bought a cop of the Daily Mail, hid it under my shirt and ran out again, and here's their page-long endorsement of Liz Truss, and they are effectively backing Liz Truss because they see her as being the heir to Boris, I mean that's their pitch right? So this idea that this was some big clearing out and a turning of the page and so on Jesse isn't really like that, this is a much more complicated, contorted leadership election in that sense. Yeah and I think that that is potentially what Liz Truss is, you know, biggest weaknesses with the electorate. I think that Labour shouldn't underestimate Liz Truss as a candidate, she's an incredibly great political survivor, she's managed to reinvent herself over three administrations and contort her politics into whatever the politics of the day demanded, and that is a, you know, that's a political skill in itself. One of the issues that she has fundamentally got wrong, I think in terms of appealing to the general electorate and where she'll struggle will be that Boris Johnson is deeply unpopular in the rest of the country, and she and selling herself as the continuity Boris Johnson candidate is a big, is an issue for her. Okay, let's just talk quickly about whoever wins this contest and what they're going to be faced with in the autumn. I mean this is the this is the sort of ghostly presence I think in the midst of what passes for political debate this summer because we all know what's going to happen. On August the 26th, I think I'm right in saying, off game the energy regulator is going to announce the new level of the energy price cap and therefore the likely levels of people's energy bills and the projections which are credible are absolutely terrifying. We're talking about typical household energy bills reaching in excess of £3,500 a year by January. That will clearly have an effect on inflation more generally. The cost of living crisis so called, which seems to me to be a social emergency, that's probably the more accurate way of putting it, is going to reach a new height and that's not going to be a time for talking about statues and how Wokiri is like a bulldozer going through the green belt and K St. Amma being a plastic patriot and all the ephemera that we've heard in the midst of this debate. That's the stuff of politics as crisis management and I just wanted to ask you both a very brief question about that really, which is what your sense is of Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss and what they've got in their political armory if they become the Prime Minister or when they become the Prime Minister to deal with that. They're both going to have to quite quickly come up with a properly thought through package in an autumn budget. I mean in terms of armory in the tank, I would say that Sunak I think intellectually is in all the Treasury officials that I speak to that work with him talk highly of him. I don't know if you saw the endorsement video William Haydiff from but that I think painted a very positive picture of him. It is pretty inexperienced in terms of how long he's been in parliament to be Prime Minister. Liz I think has done a bigger variety of jobs as Jess was saying she's kind of demonstrated herself to be a survivor but it's a very different thing from kind of boxing under the weather that someone else has created to being Prime Minister and trying to create the climate for yourself. So I think that you've got several things going on here at once. One is we kind of view the past through rose tinted spec so we tend to remember the best politicians from olden days as it were. Then I think it's actually become a harder job to do. Running the Conservative Party has definitely become a harder thing to do. Running the country I think I'd also argue has become a harder thing to do. But thirdly I think the talent pool in both parties has declined. I think the job has become less attractive. Pause there, pause there hold on. Now tell me before we move on to this question about the job being less attractive. There must be and I would imagine there are deep sort of generational and cultural factors at work here. Why do you think the political talent pool has noticeably got smaller? So I think they're mainly about who wants to come into politics at the moment. I think social media has completely changed the game. People have to put up particularly often female candidates, people from ethnic minorities but more generally put up with far more abuse than they ever would have done historically. And mainly MP's own fault because of the way they handled the whole expenses crisis but the job isn't as well-renumerated as it needs to be. And for both those reasons I think there's a whole load of people you can think of in the past you just wouldn't become MPs today. Yeah I think but I think personally our generation me and Gavin's generation, generation X was just not cut out for seeking high political office and the responsibilities that come with it. I think we're a very very cynical generation. I think we came of age in the 90s which is a very sort of superficial ephemeral sort of hedonistic decade. And therefore as Zadie Smith said famously, I watched the finest minds of my generation take jobs on the fringes of the entertainment industry. I just think there's a whole load of people of our age who are now in their sort of late 40s and early 50s who just didn't like the idea of all that responsibility and anything that halfway serious and they became a lot of them became comedians and writers and journalists and what have you I dare say and therefore there was a big gap left in politics. I think that might be addressed when it comes to people with political aspirations of Jess's age but I think generation X and politics just didn't mix. I don't know what you think of that theory Jess. My sense is really that the reason why there's not a great talent stream coming through. I know more about the talent stream in the Labour Party. With the Labour Party I think one of the problems has been is that you've had to like kind of go with the wind on party factionalism and that's been the case for decades but has been particularly been you know been in the case for you know for the past two generations of MPs. There's certain seats that various people have felt like they were owed particularly the Labour Party. You can't just be someone who just turns up and thinks you know I've had a really good career outside and I really want to give something back to my community. I want to get involved in politics but one of the few exceptions of that of course is Keir Starmer but amongst his MPs there's an awful lot of resentment about that about that route into politics and a feeling like you'd have to graft to get elected in the same way that the other people have. In the Conservative Party as well I think that there has been you know a real tendency to promote people firstly on ideological grounds and secondly on competence grounds for a long time and you saw that with Boris Johnson's cabinet never mind the selection of MPs and the 2019 intake and we've also had like the third thing I'd say is that we've had a lot of political turmoil where a lot of people who maybe weren't necessarily meant to get elected have ended up being elected on both sides of on both political parties in the last two in the last two rounds of general elections because of surprise results. Okay but we are agreed by the sound of it that there is something in the spectacle of Liz Truss battling it out with Rishi Sunak and these U-turns and the sense that this is quite a sort of insubstantial and convincing kind of contest which does say something about a deep problem as regards political talent. Is that fair to say that's that's that's a shared position? I think it's a bit a bit that I think also you know it feels to me like the whole kind of leadership election is taking place in a completely imaginary world. Yes I agree. Where you know focusing on issues that actually most of the people I represented in Croydon Central don't really care a great deal about trying to pretend that there's loads of money available for tax cuts when there isn't and you know the elephant in the room the effect that the Brexit deals have on our economy in our in our capacity to afford a certain number of public services the whole kind of debate feels to me slightly detached from the reality that we're actually going to have to deal with. We are going to talk now after this pause about the other side of politics the Labour Party kissed Arma and what he actually stands for and the stories he may or may not sooner or later tell us. Welcome back in this half of the podcast we're going to be talking about the Labour Party. After a week where kissed Arma and his front bench colleagues came out against nationalization of utilities then rode back on it then back again people have been left asking not for the first time what Starmer's values are what he believes in where the Starmer project if such a thing exists is actually going. Now a recent poll by Ipsos Morrie put Labour 14 percentage points ahead of the Conservatives. I think there's been another spate of polls lately that suggest that things now Boris Johnson is on the verge of exiting the scene are tightening up a bit but we shall see anyway the Labour Party in that poll was on 44 percent the Tories were on 30 percent so it's worth asking if Labour were to be once again the party of government do we really have an idea what that would be like and what their flagship policies would be. I have a complaint which I've voiced very regularly to the point of being completely tedious on this podcast that all I hear from kissed Arma so far really is no no no he says no to agreements with the Lib Dems no to any agreement with the SNP no to nationalizing utilities no to shadow ministers being on picket lines there is a sense to in which he wants the electorate or the media to know that his toughness is manifested in the fact that he keeps ruling things out but I wonder what he's ruling in because politics is 50 percent knows no question but it's 50 percent yeses and I don't hear many of those all we've really got so far in terms of a big headline thing is this idea which you can find all over the internet in Labour Party means that Labour's mission in government will be economic growth which is not a sort of winning political slogan much and then I didn't think they're Tories were in favour of that they're not in favour of that Gavin. You know exactly who's against economic growth well no actually that's unfair there are some there are some quite light and green people who are against economic growth so we shouldn't make that out to be a sort of heretical position but nonetheless it doesn't seem to me to put on many political parsnips he's very keen on abstract nouns security, prosperity, respect again I don't know anyone who's against any of those have you met anyone who's against prosperity or security or respect so I wonder really where's all this going and what is Keir Starmer doing? Jess there is a plan here of some description isn't there? I don't think so because I mean the more I you know speak to very senior people in Labour all the time and I think there is a concern that you know the sense that Keir Starmer would make a good Prime Minister it's not necessarily the answer to what would Keir Starmer do as Prime Minister because both those things are very different things right you know you can believe that Keir would be you know a good manager of the state but not understand what his vision is to do with that power I think there are some concerns at quite senior levels of the Labour Party about you know how they can articulate that vision until around now when I've sort of been started asking these questions in you know a lot more seriously about what what we're gonna you know when when Labour sets out its vision I've been reasonably relaxed about the no no no as you described it because my view is that in opposition you oppose things that is fundamentally your primary job is to oppose and setting out a programme for government when you're miles away from an election is is rubbish because your policy out your good policy ideas get stolen your bad ones get mocked and most of them get forgotten about so you you actually need to to start setting it out when when people are paying attention to what the alternative is but on that but but I think now is the time for sure I mean now is the time to start setting that out and you'd expect it you would expect as well to see some serious thought and serious efforts going into into the run-up to conference this is the first Labour Party conference at the end of September that Keir Starmer will be able to to speak directly to the country you know many people in the Labour thought it was inevitable they had to spend last conference sewing up all of those party reforms that was the moment of maximum power for Keir Starmer and if he was going to do it he had to do it then right now he has no excuse not to talk directly to the country okay now I'm when I make these criticisms about I saw those and I don't hear any yeses I don't mean yeses in the forms of in the form of you know fully-costed detailed policies I mean in terms of a political narrative a story about the country what we've been through who we are where we could go if the Labour Party was in government now by this stage of the political cycle when Tony Blair was around with the caveat that they were vastly different political circumstances and all the rest of it he had he had a good story he had several and he was able to convey this sense of profound optimism about the country and where it was going he had a lot of no's no to clause for you know no no to old Labour and all the rest of it that that had all been dealt with but he was a sort of yes politician and Keir Starmer doesn't strike me as being a yes politician I wonder Gavin in that or any other context you speak to people in the Conservative Party what do they think of him do they think of him now as a credible threat no I don't think they I don't think they worry too much about him that's one of the reasons why Boris Johnson took so long to go because they kind of thought well if we keep Boris we still might be able to beat Keir even with Boris sort of damaged my party game look you said you just said if I heard you right you just said you you don't think Keir's a yes politician I'd go a little bit further I'm not even sure if Keir's really a politician I think that he is someone who believes very passionately in public service but he never strikes me really as someone who's rooted in politics and this job you described of kind of having a narrative about how the country would be different if you were a Prime Minister it's the hardest thing actually you you know just thinks about the people she knows Conservative Ministers or Labour Shadow Ministers most of them know how to go about working out what they would do running a particular department or how to critique the person who's doing it at the moment but when you put them in the top job either Prime Minister or Leader of the Opposition and they have to some way create something that binds together their views on all these different issues that's the toughest thing to do and Keir doesn't seem to be anywhere close to it yeah the point is I suppose that I completely accept that coming up with convincing political narratives that can stir people enough to go and vote for you is very very difficult but that's that's one of the requirements of leadership right that's why in theory you run for the job and you get selected to do it there's a very good interview in the New Statesman's summer special with Lisa Nandy the shadow levelling up Secretary and she talks about this contrast between her experience of growing up very much in a sort of Labour Party family steeped in politics as against Kirstarmer's experience and she says quote many of us grew up in the Labour tradition I was delivering party leaflets when I was seven he's not steeped in career politics he's come in a lot more recently now that you can see in in the sense and I've heard this from people high up in the Labour Party that he accepts that narrative is not his thing which is quite an admission for a party leader that's one thing but then also just in terms of the day-to-day hurly-billy Jess he always looks nervous on TV yeah I think I think I don't want to sound too I think what Keir has done to the Labour Party shouldn't be underestimated I'm going to defend him for a little while because the Labour Party in 2019 was in like one of the worst states that you could ever see at the political party after that election they thought they might be out of power for another you know another 10 years another 15 years it wasn't inconceivable you know the state of party morale the people who were working there was a mass excess of people working for the party there are people suing each other from inside the party for vast sums of money and Keir Starmer has taken that to a 14-point lead I mean that you know that is not all the Tories collapsing I don't think there has been a fundamental remaking of the Labour Party and how it's run and how it operates which is not perfect by any stretch of the imagination there is a lot of things I would quibble about and many people would but that is no small achievement and if you speak to even very ambitious people in the shadow cabinet you might expect to be agitated as people like West Streeting they've got a lot of respect for what Keir Starmer has done to the Labour Party over that period of time but there is another step to take and the and the doubts I think are about what the how does he take that final step what is the plan for that final step and often we're told we're on the cusp of hearing it and we don't hear it. There are interesting parallels perhaps here with Theresa May-Gavin I mean she was she was regularly said to be a politician who didn't have nearly enough charisma and was too sort of stiff and unemotional and therefore couldn't tell the kind of stories that we require really from political leaders do you think that comparison is valid? She was full of the spirit of public service and duty I mean that was her calling card and maybe she lacked precisely that kind of next step thing that Jess has just mentioned. I think there's a slight difference there are some similarities there is a difference I think Theresa was steeped in politics her involvement in politics went back a long way I think that the thing by that by her own admission she found hardest was the kind of communication skills bit of a job but to your question that you were asking Jess about him him looking nervous I don't think he likes the adversarial bits of politics at all and actually probably many of the people listening to this might agree that the whole kind of pantomime show PMQs isn't particularly edifying so I don't think he's scared of it I just don't think it's it's something that he enjoys doing whereas someone like William Haig or Blair they enjoyed that regular sparring right it was they you know it was something they they took a lot of pleasure out of engaging with each other and so you were going on topics. Always on that front I always wonder like you know how important that stuff is to your regular person like that that skill like you know how much they care about whether you can like win argument on this house believes this that or the other I feel like that you know sometimes that that I feel like sometimes that is overstated one of the things that I think they read people care about so much is authenticity and and I think that was under one of the things ultimately that on the boosted Jeremy Corbyn so much in the 2017 election and ultimately was part of his undoing in the 2019 election where Brexit required him to be deeply and authentic in many ways and therefore he lost that bonus and I think he can tap into that authenticity by the way he's managed to compare himself to Boris Johnson as this kind of man of trust and integrity and that is something that he believes and that's clearly who he is but is that is that enough and does that work with the next prime minister and in conclusion that question about authenticity and looking nervous I mean I have this theory really that the public tends to take to political leaders who look like they enjoy it right it didn't take to Gordon Brown magnificently because he looked like he was having a horrible time and he didn't want to be there you know whereas Tony Blair looked like he enjoyed it David Cameron looked like he enjoyed it Theresa Theresa May didn't really look like she was enjoying it certainly not towards the end there definitely is that dichotomy and now let's assume that Liz Truss is going to win this leadership election I think she's going to have the looking nervous on TV not enjoying it terribly much problem as well I don't know if I agree with that oh I'm not sure if I agree with that I'm not sure if I agree with that you think she's going to be loving it I think the most interesting thing about this leadership election if we if we all agree it's not been a particularly edifying spectacle the most interesting thing is a load of people wrote her off the whole forehand and said she'd be wooden and hopeless and Rishi would take her apart in the hustings and the TV debates and that hasn't happened agreed I think that she's she's looked like she's enjoying this contest so there's a sporting chance that she may yet defy the odds and win a general election yeah absolutely I think no one should underestimate like how much of a task it is for Labour to win you know win back a general election not only did they have to win back the red wall but they have to win back so many more seats that night in the southwest places where demographics are moving in their favour they have to win back the vast swathes of Scotland it's an enormous task I think the odds on the Conservatives winning the next in the next election they have to be you know given the starting point I don't agree with that I think I think the most likely outcome by far is a hung parliament I don't I don't think the public at the moment have got much warmth for either of the political parties so I agree with Jess's first point but I don't think an outright win for either party isn't she's got a sporty chance but I think the most likely outcome by far is a hung parliament. Right good on that sort of mild cliffhanger we will have to stop first of all thank you for joining us today both of you Gavin Barwell and Jess Elgert. Pleasure pleasure. Thank you and thanks to you for listening I hope you enjoyed today's episode if you did make sure you subscribe to Politics Weekly UK wherever you get your podcasts and even better leave us a review preferably a nice one. Next week when the podcast goes out on Wednesday we'll be joined by the RMT Union General Secretary Mick Lynch and Miata Farnborough the Chief Executive of the New Economics Foundation to discuss strikes the future of trade unions the looming cost of living emergency you name it. This episode was produced by Frankie Toby the music is by Axel Kakutye and the executive producers are Mas Eptahaj and Nicole Jackson. This is The Guardian.