 The Guardian. Welcome to Politics Weekly Extra. I'm Jonathan Friedland. There is so much Joe Biden wants to do, including resetting America's relations with the rest of the world and restoring America's reputation. I'm recording this, for example, on the day that Joe Biden is expected to announce that he wants and intends to allow a whole lot more refugees into the United States than his predecessor did. So his intentions are many and they're good, but I keep wondering whether he's going to be able to do them, to make good on them. It's a concept of bandwidth that is constantly coming back to me, that word. And partly it's coming back to me because of the person who I think may have used it first with me, which is going back a long time ago, more than two decades, when a then rising star in the British and Labour government, he was head of the Downing Street policy unit at the time, used that word. And here's David Miliband went on to become foreign secretary in that same Labour government. He was talking back then in the late 90s about the war that was being fought in the Balkans, in Kosovo, and whether the American administration that David Miliband was then dealing with, whether they had the bandwidth to take on anything else. And probably that was a very newfangled term at the time. Back then, as you can tell, I've known him for a long time, so long, in fact, that as you'll hear, he calls me Johnny rather than Jonathan. Right now, he's the chief executive officer and president of the International Rescue Committee, a huge NGO involved in work right across the globe. He sits in New York City. He's been there some seven years. When we spoke, it was ahead and before Joe Biden's announcement about refugees. And I reminded him of that observation from the late 1990s about bandwidth. And so I began our conversation by asking him whether he thought Joe Biden and the Biden administration would have the bandwidth to cope with everything else in the world, given the fact it has to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. The short answer to that is yes, Johnny. And I say that for two reasons. First of all, COVID is connected to other issues. It's connected to other domestic issues, most notably in the economy. But it's also connected to other international issues, most notably in the way the US positions itself in the multilateral system. The second reason why I think they do have the bandwidth to do more than COVID, although clearly it's the case that COVID is the preeminent crisis that they've got to fight, is that there's no holiday from history. There's no chance to say, well, we'll sort out our domestic problems and come back in a few years' time when America's ready. The world's moving on. But fortunately, he's got a team that he trusts, a team that know him, and a team that can go about his administration's business without there being a complete log jam on decision-making. Now, that's not to say that this isn't going to be a presidency like every other that has to prioritize. It's not going to be able to do everything it says it wants to do at the speed it wants to do it at the same time. But I think that one of the experiences that we can come on to talk about is they've learned the importance of prioritization. And so I think that the short answer is yes, they should be held accountable for delivering on more than the COVID crisis. You mentioned experience being the teacher there. I mean, did you have yourself experience of the problem you've just identified with the Trump administration, where you could not get any decision out of them because it depended on the whim of this one man? No, because the issue with the Trump administration is that they had a very clear set of precepts that they applied to international aid and refugees. So everyone in the administration knew that their job was to cut the amount of money going on overseas aid. Everyone knew that they wanted to reduce the number of refugees coming to America and their help going to refugees around the world. Those are two vital parts of what the International Rescue Committee does. So the issue with the Trump administration was not bandwidth. It was policy. I mean, they were sadly competent in the way they went ahead with slashing the number of refugees coming into America. Congress forestalled some of their attacks on overseas aid. But through the use of executive orders, for example, in limiting services to women and girls, reproductive health services to women and girls around the world, they did a lot of damage in an extremely quote unquote efficient way. It wasn't a technical problem. It was a policy problem. You issued very soon after Joe Biden's inauguration a sort of nine point plan, a list of recommended policies for the first year of the Biden presidency, particularly in the areas that your organisation works. You know, many things that I think our listeners would absolutely be on board with about increasing threefold the funding against, you know, to prevent gender based violence, to reorder US aid priorities by rushing 50 percent more overseas aid to the world's worst conflict zones and so on. But one of your proposals leapt out to me and that was to immediately raise the number of refugees that the United States itself takes and to commit to resettling 125000 refugees in the US in time for the next fiscal year. And I just thought wondered, you know, you're somebody you've been an elected politician yourself. Do you think you could ever get American politicians mindful of their voters to do that, given where people are in America and around the world on the notion of migration and admission of refugees? Well, not all politicians, but some politicians, yes. The 125000 figure is the one that then candidate Biden used on World Refugee Day last June the 20th. He said, look, Ronald Reagan admitted more refugees to America than anyone else, more than 200000 in the early 1980s, many from Vietnam, South Vietnam. And candidate Biden said, I'll get up to 125000. Now the historic average has been about 90000 refugees a year allowed into America. That's obviously a small number compared to what we now know is a global refugee population, people forced from their homes by violence, persecution, conflict of 30 million. President Trump reduced the number from the 95000 that was in the last year of the Obama administration down to 15000. So he's effectively zeroed out the program. And what we've been saying to the Biden administration, what is that this program should have bipartisan support. And the answer to your question is politicians shouldn't be afraid of this. See, I suppose what I'm getting at is that what you're saying there to you know, some people will sound absolute common sense, but whether or not over the last few years, there has been a hardening of the heart that where are you know, those outstretched arms to welcome in and embrace refugees and Angela Merkel tried in 2015, but it what didn't really fly in many, many places else. And I just wonder if that you've seen, in fact, I'm going to add to that too, just this point from your nine point plan, which was about the vaccine and you suggested that the United States should share the estimated 235 million already purchased excess COVID-19 vaccines with low income countries. And there's just a big debate going on in Britain now, but you know, the surplus vaccines. And I'm just wondering if that's harder now, because as I say, whether you detect a hardening of the heart towards others, especially those far away. Well, I think these are harder times. There's no question about it. I'm not sitting here with rose tinted spectacles. But the question is, do you run away from hard questions and hard choices or do you address them? And my argument is that unless you address them, the problems get worse. And we know from the European refugee crisis that you mentioned that one of the things that completely torpedoes any attempt to help refugees is if it's not well managed. And in 2015, 16, when one and a half million people arrived in Europe, there wasn't, for example, a proper system of checking people in and registering them when they arrived. And that infuriated a lot of Europeans. And so we shouldn't be rose tinted about it. We shouldn't pretend that these are easy questions. But we should address them in a in a fact based way that is in line with values doesn't pretend that one country can do everything. Now, on the COVID question, I think there's a similar point. Look, the US has ordered 235 million more vaccines than it needs. So the excess vaccine point, I think is a practical way of recognizing that, of course, the first responsibility of government is to its own citizens. But those who say that our responsibility ends at the nation's borders are not doing any justice to the citizens within those borders, because we live in an interdependent world. This was always my argument or my fear when people threw up their hands in horror at President Trump saying America first, I will always put America first, just like you as the leaders of your countries will always and should always put your countries first. You have to remember every citizen wants their own country first. But the argument should have been you don't put America first by pretending that there's no world beyond your borders. It's absolutely imperative. I mean, John F. Kennedy gave a speech in 1962 on American Independence Day, and it was entitled the Declaration of Interdependence. That was 60 years ago. And the world has become more connected since then. And problems far away that are not dealt with get bigger and will crash through into our lives if we don't if we're not part of the solution. So putting the history aside, you in a way have no problem with the idea of America first, so long as it's the rest of the world next. The COVID crisis is the ultimate demonstration of why isolationism is going to lead to impoverishment and insecurity. Let's just on the specifics of the vaccine. Do you think those excess vaccine should just be given away to the rest of the world, the low income countries? Or do you think Britain and America should charge for the vaccines they give? Well, America, Britain and America have already made clear that far from charging, they're actually paying for global vaccines. That's the whole point of this COVAX facility, which is a World Health Organization sponsored initiative to make sure that there are global vaccines available. And just last week, the World Health Organization gave regulatory go ahead for some of the vaccines to be purchased by the COVAX. Now, unfortunately, it means that COVAX is low down the queue because the companies are now selling for the fourth quarter of this year or frankly into the middle of next year. And for the people that we serve at the International Rescue Committee, it'll be really a surprise surprising to me if next year, most of them get the vaccine. This is a long tunnel for people who are in poor countries. And frankly, the only way they're going to get it is if it's subsidised by the richer countries. And even if they are the poorest people in the world may not get it till 2023 by the sound, it sounds like. Let me just ask you about a speech you made recently, I was going to say in London, it was to London because it was like everything else. It was online and remote. But you spoke very powerful speech to the Holocaust Educational Trust. But there was one bit in there which leapt out to me simply because you are as well as working internationally, you do live in the United States, you live in New York, I think you've been there now for some seven years. And you said about America, the most powerful country in the democratic world is undergoing an unprecedented attack on its democratic system by significant sections of one of its two political parties. Now, you know, no prize if it's guessing who you're talking about, you're talking about the Republican Party. That is a pretty severe conclusion you've drawn. How do you contextualise that? And what do you think is the way out of it? The speech was about what I see as a global battle over the next decade. And it's a battle between impunity on the one hand, the rise of impunity, exercise of power without responsibility, the ultimate definition of impunity. And on the other hand, accountability. And I see that over the last 15 years in international policy and in domestic policy, there has been this rise of impunity. Now the second point is that what's happened in the United States, I think should be alarming. And I don't just mean the storming of the nation's capital, the legislative assembly. You have a significant section, as I said in my speech, of the Republican Party, according to some estimates, 70% members of the House of Representatives, Republican caucus, voting not to accept the result of the 2020 presidential election. Now, nothing could be more serious really in a democratic system. And once norms are broken, the norm of loser's consent, that if you lose an election, you accept it, the fact that in a two party system, significant sections of one of the parties should be refusing to accept the result could not be more serious. You frustrated that you're limited in how much you can say on this there? Because A, you're not a citizen and B, you're running a charity and therefore you've got to be, you know, studdily nonpartisan. Yes, I mean, it's different. I mean, I'm obviously not in active politics and I'm not a citizen here. So I can't participate in American politics and I take seriously the need for the International Rescue Committee to be nonpartisan. We navigated the Trump years very carefully by speaking to policy, not personality. If you like, to use a British terminology, we played the ball, not the man. And that was really important to us, I think, to uphold our own status. It wasn't just a legal obligation. I think it was important because we talk a lot about the need for humanitarian action to be based on good evidence, to be hard headed, to be value for money. And I think that there are values baked into the organization, very important values that go back to the origins of the organization, that the zeal of the fight against discrimination, racism, persecution is deep in the DNA. And so there are values, but we also are very zealous in trying to sustain the idea that a multi-ethnic, multi-racial, open society depends on people of all political persuasions and none. And so are there frustrations built into that? Yes, of course there are. And does that mean that I'm playing a different role now than in previous lives, in previous parts of my life? Yes, of course. But there are, you know, there are upsides as well as downsides, I would say. And I think that we need an active civil society more than ever if representative politics is not to be just buffeted by the latest social media sensation. Let me put to you a question that was recently put to the Prime Minister here. And you have a better vantage point than he does because you're living there day in, day out. And the question was, is Joe Biden and was Joe Biden woke? Well, is he passionate about fighting discrimination? Yes, of course. He has shown in the early days of the administration that he means business and the scars of racism are so deep in this society. It's long past time for some big changes to be made. Now whether you want to call that woke or not, the Prime Minister seemed a bit flustered by the question. But I think what I would the way I would have answered is to say, look, I think Joe Biden is serious. He's serious about taking on some scars, treating some scars in the American body politic. I suppose what I had in mind a bit was that it seemed to me that he had some skill in avoiding the kind of culture war issues. And you know, for example, it was noted that Kamala Harris has now put her pronouns in her Twitter biography as Twitter profile. I don't think she had those in though, before November the third when they were seeking election. And I'm just wondering whether the lesson that you would draw from the Biden Harris victory is that you are probably wisest to avoid those issues when you're campaigning, even if you take a good, serious and strong stance once you've won. I think that the lesson of the Biden Harris campaign is far less tactical than you suggest. The lesson of the campaign is that you have to be gimler eyed in your goal. And the goal has to be founded on a very clear understanding of why you're running and a very clear proposition about what you're going to do instead. And the bookends of the Biden campaign were the Charlottesville riot in 2017, which Joe Biden says brought him into the campaign. He saw the America that he was proud of under threat. And he thought he worried that there was no one else in the field who was going to be able to beat President Trump. Well, the other bookend was the sixth of January, where the wheel had come full circle and the riot in Charlottesville had moved to an insurrection. That was the other bookend. And President Biden had a very clear rationale for his disagreement with President Trump. And he turned that rationale into a proposition of his own candidacy. And of course, that included issues of racial justice. And I think the lesson is far less tactical. It's far more fundamental. You've got to know why you disagree with the government you're trying to replace. And you've got to be able to show that you've got the ideas and the ability to then do something about it. You are in the unusual position, not many people around who are veterans of a center left government that was elected not once, not twice, but three times. Given that experience, do you have advice for Joe Biden and Kamala Harris and the Democrats? Not about winning once, because they've done that in November 2020, but about keeping majorities and I suppose in Congress expanding those majorities because they're wafer thin. I think that they've got their own consultants and their own ideas more than mine. But here's the thing that we, I think, didn't do well. My former colleague Phil Wilson, who was the MP for Sedgefield, he said we were elected on the 1st of May 1997 and we stopped reforming the party on the 2nd of May 1997. And we didn't pay a price for that until 2010. But when I say that if you want to remove a government, you've got to be clear about your disagreement. You've got to be clear in your proposition. But the third element is you've got to organize for change. And the power of that was shown in the hard fought wins by a matter of 1 percentage point, 0.4 percentage points in Georgia. So you've got to keep your politics. And I think when I referred earlier to this being an administration with experience, what I, and I said that I thought it was important, here's why I think it's important. My feeling is, my understanding is that many of those who served in the Obama administration, their experience is not that they want to do the same. Their experience is taught them they've got to do different. And one of the things that they have to do different is that they have to make sure that they don't neglect the politics. Because in the early years of the Obama administration, it's clear that they got outplayed politically. They lost that Senate seat that belonged to, or that was sat in by Edward Kennedy. They lost his seat after a year in Massachusetts of all places. And they lost control of the politics. And I think that the appointments and the plans that the Biden administration set out show that they don't just want to govern. They want to continue to recognize that they're a political party, not just an administration. And it's interesting if you think about it, we use the term government, and they use the term administration in America. And the government is intended to be political. The danger of a quote unquote administration is that it's just technocratic. And I think this administration, this group of people don't want to fall into that trap. David, we always ask a what else question when we can for people to people who come on the podcast. So this time, Jared Kushner being nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. What do you think about that? Is that is this a is this fiction? Or is this is this fact? I think Trump's lawyer Alan Dershowitz has submitted the name of Jared Kushner because of the deal the peace deals done between Israel and various Gulf states, and therefore think he should win the Nobel Peace Prize. What do you reckon? This is news to me, I think the only iron law I know of, in respect of the Nobel prizes is that if you campaign for them, you are doomed never to get it. So that's that's all I would say that the Nobel Committee make an absolute fetish that any campaigning is not as frowned upon is a is an immediate torpedo on your on your chances. You do you sound as if you've got some experience in this field surely not. Well, I do I know about there's a couple of people and a couple of institutions that previously have and it's rebounded on them very badly. And one of the very nice things about the World Food Programme winning the Nobel Peace Prize in December was that was precisely because they'd been mission driven and gone about their business. They'd never bothered with with that. It's just a golden rule. David Miliband, president and CEO of the International Rescue Committee. Thanks so much for joining me on the podcast. Thank you, Johnny. And to hear more about what's happening in David's old stamping ground of Westminster, do make sure to listen back to Wednesday's episode of Politics Weekly, where Heather Stewart looks at the problems facing Northern Ireland after Brexit and at Rishi Sunak's quandary over universal credit ahead of the budget, as well as much more. You can search for that in the same feed where you found us. But for now, it's goodbye from me. The producer is Danielle Stevens and I'm Jonathan Friedland. I hope you're all keeping well. And as always, thanks so much for listening.