 This is The Guardian. Six or seven years ago, a lot of people felt very disconnected from politics and politicians. They felt politicians were self-serving and privileged and those feelings had been hugely increased by the MP's expenses scandal. The result arguably was Brexit and a long spell of political turbulence followed. Now it feels like after all that we might be back at square one. Party day. A super rich chancellor who fails at photo opportunities and a backbench Tory MP facing allegations of sexual assault and cocaine use. Meanwhile we're told by senior conservators that all that stuff is now irrelevant and we ought to focus all our attention on the war in Ukraine. Well you know what? I think we can probably talk about both. I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Week, the UK for The Guardian. Joining me today are The Guardian column is Zoe Williams and me at a farm below the chief executive of the new economics foundation who previously worked in the cabinet office for Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick Clegg. That's right. Wow what a life. The whole bag. For one so young. Hello to you both. Hello. I wanted to talk first of all about the fact that Covid, the pandemic which we're sort of told by the people on high has largely come to an end and is now has receded so much it's barely there. It's still very much with us and is affecting all our lives. My kids school timetables for example are all completely up in the air and we keep getting messages saying school might not be happening tomorrow. Life is still odd in that regard isn't it? It's what was weird is that because I went to France on Saturday and there's kind of there's like lip service. You still have to have a vaccine passport and everybody's got those but it's like really really obvious that nobody cares anymore whether they've got Covid, nobody's testing, nobody wants to test. It's like you were saying people are bound to be off work but actually if you're now having to pay for tests you're on minimum wage and you'd have to take the time off without getting remunerated. There's no way you're gonna test if you don't have to. No but there's a whole load of experiences, really important things in people's day-to-day lives that are completely up in the air again. I mean Easy Jet has just cancelled 200 flights over the Easter period I read the other day. Schools, worst places. Was that all Covid though? I'm not sure. Apparently it's always because of Covid, absolutely. So the British Chamber of Commerce came out and said businesses seeing about 20% absent rates at the moment due to Covid and this is what I think is completely mad because yes let's live with Covid. I don't think anyone disputes that but it does require you to have a minimum level of something and for me that testing is a really basic thing. I just don't know. Free tests. Free tests or if you're not going to make tests free then why on earth two quid a test? So my son had Covid a couple of weeks ago and they were like frantically trying to buy a test. You can only buy them by the way in the big pharmacist and then it's like for five tests, ten pounds a box and I was just like we're family of five and I'm like that's like ten pound a pop and if I'm thinking that I'm like who is who can afford to do this and you speak to people on the continent and it's a fraction of the price. So if you're going to force people to pay for it, get the price down. But the result is nobody tests and then we get cancelled flights and school timetables in meltdown and queues in all the shops. There's definitely a knock on but I mean I honestly think that all the kind of temporary inconveniences you can work with, the problem is going to be if long Covid is like a significant factor because it's a nightmare. I mean it's you know like two years basically without any function. So yeah it's a disaster. We still don't know. We talked about the ending of free tests which which plays into by far the the biggest domestic political story right now and I suspect for the next few years which is the cost of living crisis which we'll be talking about. First of all though we're going to talk about a contrasting impression of excess at the top of the Tories, the top of the Conservative party and in particular the seemingly never-ending story of Partygate and then we will move on to what some people call the cost of living crisis but I think we maybe ought to call the mounting social emergency and where it sits perhaps in the midst of that impression of excess and privilege at the top. So Partygate to start with, the Metropolitan Police have started to find people who work at the heart of government. There are a couple of examples from this week, I think we're now on to our third tranche of fines but one set of fines was for a leaving due in the Cabinet Office in June 2020 which led to a fine for irony upon ironies Helen McNamara who was the Director General for propriety, you're laughing me out, for propriety and ethics in the Cabinet Office. There's been another load of fines for the infamous party in April 2021 on the Eva Prince-Philippe's funeral where the Downing Street swing was broken and I think of another tranche of fines relating to the leaving due for Kate Josephs who was the head of the Government's Covid-19 task force, another howling irony. What we're still waiting for is an answer to the question of whether the Prime Minister or his wife are going to be fined. Clearly Partygate hasn't gone away meanwhile at the weekend there was a huge amount of coverage of David Warburton who happens to be my local MP. Oh no way. Yes in summer and for him in Somerset and allegations of sexual misconduct and cocaine taking which he denies and his failure to declare a hundred thousand pound loan from a Russian businessman. The Tories don't want us to talk about any of that, Partygate, General Maryman, so-called sleaze and all the rest of it, they want us to focus on the war in Ukraine. They say that Partygate is no longer important, it's what they call fluff. This is Jacob Reiss-Mogg making this point reasonably well on LBC. We have a war going on in Ukraine, we have atrocities being carried out, we have pictures coming through that show the enormous brutality of Putin's army and what I was saying was that in the context of what is going on not just with Ukraine but also with the cost of living crisis this is not the most important issue in the world. Having said that people should obviously obey the law. Obviously now he's saying that clearly for reasonably sort of self-serving reasons but there is a tension there isn't there? I sort of feel it a bit that I'm interested in Partygate and I think Partygate is important but you know I spent the time on the train getting here reading reports of the war in Ukraine and watching videos about Russian atrocities and it you know there's something a bit sort of imbalanced. Well look there's two two isn't there? There's two separate things going on right there's firstly there's the locus of one's own attention which as you say I'm not very interested that David Warburton's story kind of diverted me for a second but I'm not that interested it's set in context of the atrocities in Bukov but the other thing going on is that you're meant to feel slightly ashamed of raising it as though you're kind of trivial minded and you're and you know you're drawing attention away from the plight of the Ukrainians with your trivial concerns and therefore you're failing them as an international community and as you say that does make you feel a bit uncomfortable because even if it's Jacob Rees-Mogg saying right I mean yes. Do you feel it yourself? Yeah look so I think there's a magnitude issue and I think when you are seeing you know just the horrendous horrendous situation in Ukraine when you're thinking about people who are experiencing almighty squeeze it does feel trivial by comparison it does but and this is a big but I still think it matters and for me that you know that sense of gut anger that I felt and I think a lot of people felt over partygate was genuine and real because for me it goes to the standards that we expect of our politician and it wasn't just you know it wasn't just the double standards around the parties and breaking the rules it was the lie it was the cover-up and I think it is unforgivable I think we have to not forget how the nation felt at that point when you just like actually we expect better of our politicians. It's about something even more fundamental than that isn't it it's about the rule of law and the idea that the people who come up with the laws and are responsible for the laws have to obey them themselves because if they don't and I'm not sure whether this is a sort of unseemly point to make but I'm not sure then we can lecture the rest of the world about the rule of law and what a democracy is and how authority works and any of that. Well look there's an unseemly point to make if you're drawing any kind of equivalence between a military atrocity and a suitcase full of wine but where it's not an unseemly point to make is where you're you know what it makes is an embarrassment of the government it makes them embarrassing if they can't tell the truth and they can't obey their own rules it makes them embarrassing in a domestic context and it makes it embarrassing to field them internationally and I think that in a sense even though we're sort of embarrassed to talk about it with Ukraine going on the war in Ukraine has really underlined how fundamentally unserious these people are. Yeah unseriousness is a good word in that context. Yeah I think it's that and I also think you know alongside that war in Ukraine there's a battle about the west and values and democracy and a whole set of things that are being kind of put alongside the thing that Putin represents and I don't think you can stand for that and lie. I don't think you can stand for that and have double standards I don't think you can stand for that and say the laws that we put in place don't count for us I think it it makes it all shallower it makes it harder to take the moral authority on the international stage. I mean the public it seems still care about partygate there was a really good piece by Andrew Ronsley and Sunday's Observer which quotes materials from a focus group that a pollster called James Johnson did and he described one voter saying that the Tory leader was a buffoon a joke an idiot and worst of all a liar you can't have a liar someone else called him a hypocritical clown right so this is still pretty Syrian language on the part of the public meanwhile isn't yet another tension in this conversation in Ukraine we are told the impression of Boris Johnson is very different he's acquired almost a heroic reputation Vladimir Zelensky said in one of his speeches over the last few days thank you Boris for the leadership historical leadership I'm sure of it can both things be true that he's missed the partygate and he's a pathetic clown but as far as Ukraine is concerned he's done okay no I mean you've got to think you've got to consider Zelensky's position here he can't pick a fight with Putin and Boris Johnson at the same time he has to maintain a very positive aspect towards the rest of the world so that everybody is united in you know condemning Russia can I say something he's not going to start yeah yeah I'm gonna say something I never thought I'd say which is because I don't think it's just the optics of how Zelensky's trying to play us and play his allies I think to the credit of Boris Johnson he has shown a version of him that I've never seen before I think he has been more serious I think he's been more stately I think he's been more outward facing I think he has shown leadership which I never ever thought I'd say and the question I have in my head is is it an act or is it a real thing I mean I'd want to see some concrete iteration of it though I mean well that he was very quick as regards supplying military assistance to Ukraine quicker than a lot of other leaders in the so-called west he just was like quicker like that's what he says that's what Zelensky says he clearly has many flaws which I don't think has gone away because I don't think you could have done everything you've done to your political career and suddenly become a hero but the thing I have sort of taken away is that act or not I wish we had this version of Boris Johnson all the time because as long as he's our prime minister I'd much rather have this version of Boris Johnson than the thing that we've seen over the last 18 months and I don't know whether maybe it has been a wake-up call and he's sort of upped his game or maybe it's a big charade I don't know I think domestic politics though is just is too complicated for him that's the point right war in Ukraine notwithstanding the awfulness of what's gone on right it has clear moral outlines he can deal with yeah whereas when if you get into the social emergency of cost of living or energy policy or levelling up or any number of things that just seems to me to confound him well yeah but you know if you look at the way the refugee situation has been handled he doesn't actually step up I'd want to see a decision that that costs him something before I would say he's been a good leader at this time the situation with visas and the backlogs are really disgusting and shaming so no I'm really I'm not impressed by him at all we will return to this this is a all the potential of a conversation that may run and run I wanted to talk about something that sits under this impression of excess and wealth and all that which partygate sort of symbolizes the premise of brexit as far as a fair few people who voted for it were concerned was that politicians were out of touch with the real struggles of people in their lives and as I said earlier here we are six years later and it feels reasonably similar to that there is a sense of being back at square one Boris Johnson used that resentment against politicians and that sort of anti-elite politics ironically for someone who went to eat and there's a classic screen box for that right but he used that to his advantage he definitely rode that wave and now it seems he's on the receiving end of a lot of those sort of sentiments and opinions I worry a lot as well about public cynicism I mean it's a cynical age but politics can't really work in an atmosphere of huge public cynicism and I worry that soon act presented the Philippines car with petrol or flying off to have his Easter holidays in California in the midst of a cost of living crisis Boris Johnson in his wallpaper and partygate and all that it just turns people off generally and I think they sort of tark his garment and the labor front venture with the same brush well we end up back where we were before so my favorite line about the whole 2019 election campaign was Anthony Barnett saying or somebody in open democracy saying if Boris Johnson made everybody hate politicians and then gave them a chance to walk away from it so if you look at that campaign it was all Brexit's done this is over you can forget us and it wasn't just it was exactly as you say an attempt not an attempt to kind of you know rehabilitate politics but to make it so disgusting that there was nothing to like and nothing to hope for and nothing to dream about and he did that quite well if he's really pulled that off well then he'll be a mean he'll be a mean won't he yeah so you mean you just you just assure people that they're exceedingly low expectations of politicians are entirely correct yeah yeah and therefore you can spend as much money as you like on expensive wallpaper and suitcases full of wine and fly off for your holidays wherever you fancy and no one cares are we are we there so I think we are I mean I don't think we are well so I think our biggest risk is disdain and apathy at the moment because the thing that we're seeing I think is completely horrendous I think some of the stuff the government has done some of the things that I think the prime minister stands for is absolutely atrocious but people are like well yeah yeah no I mean I worry about cynicism they're all the same I worry about cynicism but having said that if you go back through all that stuff from the focus group there's a clear moral sense there those people clearly expect something better from the people in charge they do but the question then you asked is would you vote that person so I've had you know had lots of conversations with people and they were like oh he's an absolute charlatan but he's our charlatan and that you know but they're no better and what can I can see the labor and no better because I've heard that but do people actually say he's our charlatan that they what do they happy with that because we know where we are we know where we are with him he doesn't pretend to be something different because I keep having this conversation because I can't believe it I'm like you can't see everything that he's done which is why by the way I think partigate is important and the thing I always sort of whenever I talked to sort of conservative MPI was like we the people who stood up and said we deserve better than this I had so much respect for that you know put that underneath the table and try and make it go away what does it say about our politics and what does it say about the standards that we think the public can tolerate and should tolerate and it feels like we're at a tipping point where this matters okay I like tipping point I don't think it's got so awful that there's no way back and that public cynicism is sort of rampant and you and you can't turn it around I don't buy that let's pause there in a minute we'll talk about the very contrasting reality of the cost of living crisis mounting social emergency as it continues to affect people the poorest people obviously but also people higher up the income scale welcome back a few weeks ago the focus of the news quite rightly in the wake of the chancellor spring statement was on the poorest people in the UK but there are other aspects of the cost of living crisis it's right that that we talk about the gravity of that crisis for people on the lowest incomes in their case it really is a social emergency but there's also a conversation about how much it's going to affect or is affecting people further up the income scale people who've probably got used to thinking of themselves as secure and relatively safe I want to talk a bit about that and its possible political effects and I think we've already seen one which is what's happened to Rishi Sunak a matter of weeks ago Rishi Sunak was still the next leader of the conservative party you know it feels like he's the first political casualty of a possibly changed public mood all these things that have happened that are rich with symbolism you know can he or can't he use contactless payment in a garage that wasn't his car that he filled up he's holidaying in Santa Monica we're told he's just made a hundred thousand pound donation to Winchester college for bursaries for people who can't necessarily afford the fees I don't know whether that changes the morals of that or not probably slightly not at all not at all not remotely go on oh for god's sake because I tweeted that yesterday and I felt bad and deleted it so so come on stiffen my spine a bit here he's the chancellor he's just on the spring statement he people are going to be really really suffering for a really long time if he has a hundred grand to give away he needs to do it in such a way that at least acknowledges where people are nobody's sitting there thinking I wish my son could go to Westminster Winchester Winchester sorry come on they're thinking I wish my son could have some shoes I mean this is what we're talking about so it's the most unbelievably tone interesting question then right do you think he does this knowing full well it looks awful or is he so separated from people's everyday lives by dint of his family's huge wealth that he wouldn't even see that that's a potentially toxic thing to do how's she don't know do you know him yeah I do I do so I went to uni with him wow did you know him quite well uh yeah so he was in my sort of friendship group who was in the year below but yeah we were in the sort of same friendship group and I just got drunk with with Rishi so I have had a few drinks with him wow go on keep going so so here's the question yes does he know or doesn't he know I think he's just really out of touch and I think he's not a bad guy and so I have really struggled to get my head around some of the decisions that he's making the only conclusion I've come to is that he is just so removed from that world like if you don't really know what it feels like to have to make that decision between like not eating today not feeling you and you can see it on paper but you can't taste you can't feel it in your gut in a way that means that you can make decisions that you can rationalize without feeling that that you're just doing something do you think that sets him apart from other MPs I mean he's hardly the only wealthy MP no he's much richer than every other MP who's why I mean his wife is said to be maybe Jacob is worth more than the queen yeah it's a lot of money but can I just ask did he wear like 280? I do want to go about that! Did he wear like sliders worth 180 quid at university? Did he drink Bollinger for breakfast? Did he have a shirt? Did he have his he-sees coffee cup? He was he was he was quite normal but he would stand as a Oxford, rich says it all the time. All this is particularly relevant now we're talking on the day that the national insurance tax rise comes in which means 1.25p extra in the pound being paid by people who pay national insurance so you know that that again brings home the symbolism of the person responsible for all this being the same person who it seems is rich beyond the dreams of avarice. I wonder whether you can join partygate to the allegations against David Warburton to soon acts wealth and all that and you and there's something there isn't there in terms of optics and maybe a couple more of these stories and this might start to acquire quite a lot of weight it's not a good time to sort of be presenting this face to the public. I feel like you're in Sipien cost the living crisis. I feel like you're kind of nostalgic about the 90s but the early 90s would suddenly get me too. But that you know that point of which every single thing the conservatives did just fed into the same sleaze narrative they couldn't do anything without it seeming incredibly sleazy and corrupt. I'm not sure I mean that. No no but you know you're wanting it to feed into a kind of picture of excess but I don't think excess and hedonism and flamboyant and wealth and brimmed with. I don't think excess and hedonism are really the theme here I think hypocrisy is the theme. Excess and hedonism is quite fun nobody hates the the sight of somebody else enjoying themselves. I disagree I think excess excess. I disagree I hate people enjoying themselves. But the suitcase full of wine and the wine fridge in the midst of partygate right acquires a real resonance if people can't afford to pay their rent and are aware when they're going around the supermarket of counting every last penny. That's what I mean by excess or flying off to California for your spring holidays. But this is it I think your organizing principle is hypocrisy and you know cluelessness rather than although so for me I think it's just that sense of out of touch because apparently all the polling suggests that out of touch is resonating and it's just like two different lives two different worlds which has always sort of been the case but I think when people are feeling so raw when it's so tough just the sense that there's this bunch of people that are like on another planet and don't get it don't get you don't get your life. I think that's the thing that's toxic. Now let's talk about this in the context of the sheer reach of the so-called cost of living crisis because politically this may get really difficult for the conservatives precisely because it affects people higher up the income scale. I know that you probably have figures you can hit us with that illustrate this. Yeah so we we did a sort of an analysis last month that essentially looked at the people who essentially are struggling struggling with day-to-day struggling to stay afloat 24 million people so 34 percent of the population we put under this bracket of struggling to stay afloat they're having to make day-to-day sacrifices you know whether it's deciding I can't afford to buy that shoe for my kid I can't afford to do this and for me that's like a really staggering number and you know to be fair it's the thing that I think Theresa May started to get with her just about managing's like there's this cohort now and for me that's where the politics becomes difficult for the government because I think you know that the bottom end has always been the most tragic story but they're immune to it it's not their voters I think as you move up that cohort that squeeze middle that they were you know in red wall areas they appeal to the combination of the two together I think creates a big problem. I was wondering I was going to ask what it meant generationally I mean how hard pensioners were being hit because if you look at the spread of conservative voters they're relying very heavily on that generation. So this is working age primarily we're seeing it kids the thing I still can't believe is that half of kids are in households that are struggling which is just absolutely phenomenal. Up to now I think they have protected pensioners with the triple lock I think what's quite interesting is you know they didn't uprate pensions with inflation because they didn't uprate benefits with inflation so there's going to be a bit of a squeeze but for me it's that story of the working age struggling that will be the story that I think will sort of shift our politics. People who up to now in a lot of particularly conservative politicians minds they'll have thought of as being aspirational and thinking of themselves as being you know at least aiming at being comfortably often all the rest of it and the sheer sort of shock very often to some of those people of really feeling this precariousness and this anxiety will have political effects clearly even in the May elections I mean this will be a factor in the May elections wouldn't it? It should do it should do and I think it will do you know and for me I'm always advocating and campaigning for those at the bottom end because I think they've been voiceless as you know social security and everything has been kind of hammered away over the decade but I think there's an interesting coalition that's about to be built between that squeeze middle and those at the sharp end of you know both things like a social security system that isn't working for them because some of them will be claiming some benefits but also you know earnings that have pretty much stagnated for getting on for 20 years and it is that combined story that is their story that I think is like the defining issue and if they can find a collective voice I think that's the way that starts to shift our politics. When Miata said that half of kids in the UK are in these struggling households your eyes wide like wow yeah I mean it's still shocking isn't it? It's unbelievable and you speak to so many poverty campaigners who struggle so hard to animate this issue for the news and you know it's like people are always like how does it get how does it get reach or cut through or whatever but they don't they're not talking about reach or cut through they're how do you get a journalist interested you know the media can be so callous and they've tried to animate it so many ways you know this is how much shopping you could buy on this many benefits but I think it is getting to the point where everybody can see how bad that is. I want to move on on that hopeful note to something that is happening as we speak which is the government's slightly delayed announcement of its supposed energy strategy but as Johnson has already given a hint of what's going to be and that we can hear a bit of it now. As we did during Covid we will make sure we look after people to the best of our ability. Now we've got to be frank with people there's a limit to the amount of taxpayers money we can simply push towards trying to deal with global energy price spikes but what we can do is make sure that we fix some of the long-term problems and I think it was a great mistake not to invest long term in nuclear power and I'll be saying a lot more about that. Miata this energy strategy will at least partly be framed in the context of the cost of living crisis won't it and the idea of sort of long-term fixes for energy price spikes and all of that. Is your sense that it's going to be convincing? Well it has to speak to the cost of living it has to be about energy security it has to be about guarding us against these sorts of shocks and so the question will be does it do enough and for me if it doesn't and all the indications because there's apparently a bonfire between number 10 and number 11 around. Oh really? Yeah around investment in. Going out with the Treasury. Home installation so you know we've been banging on about you know if you were to do a mass upgrade scheme of homes which you could do over the course of you know four years invest 12 billion get about four or five million homes target it at the poorest homes that's the way in which you reduce the cost of energy. Number 10 are trying to get more money for it Treasury have blocked it so I know it's not going to have a big component of that. I fear it's going to try and lean into there'll be some stuff on your nuclear but it'll look into things like fracking which are not really the solution and actually you know one of the quickest ways look at onshore wind you know look at renewables because we know we can bring them on stream quite quickly so I think there's an opportunity for the government to actually do some stuff that will bite potentially the next or three four years whether it does it or not I think is another matter. To end we talked about this impression the government is giving out of sort of privilege and brazen wealth and hypocrisy as Zoe said a moment ago and it sort of is in political trouble domestically I suppose two questions arise from that firstly looking ahead can they get through this and still come out on top and we are talking after all about the Western world's most successful vote winning machine in history and all the rest of it and also there's another point of tension in this which is that certainly in modern history you only get Labour government selected when people are feeling secure enough to take the risk and hard times it is said. To be honest I just completely reject that as a as a pattern find. Tell me why because it doesn't really stand up because 45 wouldn't have happened. Exactly we only ever get a Labour government as a moonshot it's once a generation it's when Labour comes together but promising you. I've had the idea of a Labour government as a moonshot. Yeah yeah but it's a once in a generation event. It's a kiss to everyone. It's a kiss to everyone on the moon. I actually can't imagine him on the moon. It's like it's all the other places I can't imagine him. Another large step for the Labour party. He's exactly the kind of person who would be an astronaut he keeps himself from fine health and he doesn't need much company but anyway it's not that people need to feel secure and they'll take a punt it's that the Labour really has to kind of encapsulate their dreams for what could be possible and it won't happen if they don't do that. I think it's all to play for. I think it's all to play for. I think you can't underestimate the government and you know if Boris is still in which I think there's a chance he might be he is a phenomenal phenomenal campaigner. I think if there is and this is not a party political point I think if there is kind of justice out there I don't think you can do Cartigate and everything else. I don't think you can have ballsed up the pandemic in response in the way you did. I don't think you can have seen the cost of living crisis have not acted and be elected again. Like if there is justice that shouldn't happen but it may well happen and one of the reasons it might happen is that if people don't think there's an alternative and that is about Labour defining itself in terms that people feel that there is hope that there is something worth voting for rather than staying at home and saying that you're all as bad as each other. On that cheery note that's all nip out and buy a suitcase full of wine to tentatively celebrate. I've actually got a wine fridge. I thought you were going to say I've actually brought a suitcase full of wine but it's only Wednesday. Thank you both for joining us Miata and Zoe. Thanks for having us. Thank you. And thank you to you for listening. If you enjoyed today's episode which I know you did please make sure you subscribe to Politics Weekly UK wherever you get your podcasts and even better leave us a review but only if it's a good one. And if you enjoy listening to The Guardian's Jonathan Friedland discussing US politics every Friday you'll want to subscribe to his new podcast as Jonny's show won't be available on this podcast so to get all of the latest news from Washington and beyond search for Politics Weekly America and hit subscribe. That's Politics Weekly America out every Friday. This episode was produced by Natalie Ktena, music was by Axel Kakutye and the executive producers are Maz Eptahaj and Nicole Jackson. We'll be back having recovered from my suitcase full of wine next Thursday.