 This is The Guardian. Queen Elizabeth II has died at the age of 96 after 70 years on the throne. I declare before you all that my whole life, whether it be long or short, shall be devoted to your service and the service of our great imperial family to which we all belong. She swore in 15 Prime Ministers and not least in the endless turbulence of the last 10 or 15 years, she was a symbol of continuity and she gave some people a vivid connection with a more stable period of British history. Now we're in the midst of a period of deep social and political instability and a new transfer of political power so you can only ask what's on the horizon. I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Week in the UK for The Guardian. Joining me today are The Guardian columnists Gabby Hinsliffe and Gavin Barwell, the former Downy Street Chief of Staff under Theresa May, who's a member of the Privy Council, the head of state's formal body of advisors, and in his capacity as a government whip, he was an officer of the Royal Household. Hello to you both. Hello. Hi John. Today we're going to be looking at what we know about the Queen, her 70 year reign and the role she played within the British political system. We're also going to be talking about the many, many ways that her death will impact on Britain and British politics and what it might mean for the future. Let's start by listening to Liz Truss, who's been the Prime Minister for a matter of days, making a statement immediately after the Queen's passing outside Downy Street. Through thick and thin, Queen Elizabeth II provided us with the stability and the strength that we needed. She was the very spirit of Great Britain and that spirit will endure. She has been our longest ever reigning monarch. It's an extraordinary achievement to have presided with such dignity and grace for 70 years. Let's remind ourselves of the Queen's main functions as head of state. She appointed Prime Ministers and all other ministers. She opened new sessions of Parliament. She gave Royal Assent to bills passed by Parliament, signifying that they became law. But there was much more to it than that. We got a sense of the relationship between Prime Ministers and the Queen this morning. Here's Theresa May on Radio 4's Today programme discussing her weekly audience with the Queen. Officially, it's called an audience, but it was a conversation and it was a conversation with somebody who was immensely knowledgeable, who did her red boxes, who read her papers, who knew what was going on, who'd had that tremendous experience over the years of her reign, who knew, as he said, many of the world leaders. And I always say it was that one meeting a Prime Minister went into when they knew that nothing that was said was going to be briefed to the press or leaked afterwards. Gavin, you were Chief of Staff to Theresa May, which he was Prime Minister at that time. What do you remember about your sort of impression of those meetings? It's interesting that they're unique in the sense that they're free of public attention and scrutiny and so on. They're private meetings. They are so private, the Prime Minister didn't use to discuss with me what went on in them. You know, you wouldn't take your political adviser with you. It's probably the only meeting in her diary each week that I would never go to. She would take her Principal Private Secretary, the head civil servant in number 10. And all she ever said to me about it was really the essence of what you've just quoted there, that she found them incredibly useful because of the huge historical experience of the person that she was speaking to. And because, you know, given the enormous pressure that she was under, she could unburden herself in those meetings and talk frankly knowing the one meeting every week where she knew that it wouldn't leak out. So we know nothing about them, but it's clear from listening to people like Theresa May and John Major, Gabby, that they were more than a formality. Yes, they were a lot more than a formality. I mean, they're the nexus of the relationship between sort of the palace and government. They're an exchange, you know, she's expecting to be informed and have explained to her and go into detail of what government is doing. But also, you know, there is a flow of information back the other way. I mean, if you were, and that wasn't just true of her audiences with with Prime Minister's, actually, if you were a sort of Foreign Secretary or Foreign Minister in conversation with her, you could be, you know, talking about, you know, a meeting that you just had with a foreign head of state. And she'd say, oh, I remember his father said X, you know, and you'd suddenly realise that she had 30, 40 years of experience of, you know, inside out of dealing with this country and with the governance of this country. And you'd been Foreign Secretary for five minutes. So, you know, there is a sort of repository, an institutional memory there, a repository of knowledge that, you know, that could be used by governments of the day. And Tony Blair used to say exactly the same thing that Theresa May said, that, you know, this was a confidential relationship, almost a sort of confessional relationship in the sense that you could trust her where you knew she wasn't making notes for her memoirs. Unlike everyone else that you spoke to in cabinet, she wasn't ever she didn't know she wasn't a competitive threat to you in the way that other politicians are. And she had a relationship with other heads of state that was different from the relationship that a prime minister has. It's interesting that idea of sort of deep, long sort of institutional memory, particularly at a point now when politics seems to move through these great clearouts every 18 months or two years. And it's very hard to identify where the institutional memory is. Gavin, briefly, and I don't know how much you're allowed to tell us, can you just give us a flavor of what it is in terms of the relationship between people from politics and the monarch about A, being a member of the Privy Council, and then B, a role I didn't know about that you told me about just before we started doing this, that in your capacity as a government whip, you were an office of the Royal Household. So what sort of interactions did both those things involve? So it's a Privy Council, relatively limited every now and then there'll be a meeting of a very small subgroup of the Privy Council. If there are certain things that need to be dealt with, I was only a brief period where I was a Privy Council and I'm still active as an MP because I got the Privy Council very shortly before I lost my seat. The whip role was a fascinating one. So just very briefly, the numbers two, three and four in the government whips office are also officers of the Royal Household. So when you get the job, you get a private audience with the Queen where she gives you a wand of office, which is like a snooker queue, essentially. And you have three jobs. You escort Her Majesty or other members of the Royal Family at the Royal Garden parties. You escort her at the diplomatic reception and you escort her to Parliament for the state opening of Parliament. Indeed, the number four in the whips office, the Vice Chamberlin, is held as a hostage at Buckingham Palace while Her Majesty goes to Parliament to open it. And this dates back, if you think about the history of it, post-Civil War, Parliament was nervous that the monarch, Charles I, had brought troops into the House of Commons. And the new king was nervous that Parliament had ultimately executed his father. So a sort of deal was done that the monarch can't go to the House of Commons anymore. That's why the state opening takes place in the House of Lords. And that when they do come to Parliament, an MP is held hostage pending the monarch's safe return. So I had a number of private discussions with her during the year and a bit when I was doing that role. What was she like? So it's not just the history point that Gabby covered so well, the kind of institutional, she was very, very well informed about contemporary politics. She clearly took very seriously the box note she would have been getting about what her government was doing. And so I would say a conversation with her about politics, she was absolutely as on the ball as any political journalist or sort of fellow MP that you'd have a conversation with about what was going on right now, as well as having that depth of historical perspective that she could bring to things. That's not just about knowledge of the wider world, is it? So she was up to speed on factional tensions that get in the way of government and who's in and who's out and who's acting up and who's not, all of that stuff. So the device Chamberlain, so this is the number four in the government's whip office, writes her a daily report on what's going on in parliament and she clearly read them. And there, I mean, there's not a job I have to do, but I watched colleagues doing it and she enjoyed them being a little bit irreverent and including a little bit of gossip. So she was exactly, as you say, not just informed about the legislation that was going through and what it was going to do, but she had a good reading of what was going on within our politics. Now, by and large, to state the obvious, one of her great talents, which is reflected in the tributes we were in since she died, was this very resolute ability, determination, however you present it, to sort of stay out. So that's quite a balance to strike, as well as being sort of intimately aware of all of these things to do what a constitutional monarch has to do, which is not to be political. But nonetheless, we all know that that can't hold permanently and there are inevitably moments of tension and all the rest of it. I was reading overnight about the fact that she did not like Mrs. Thatcher's stance on sanctions against apartheid South Africa because she, the Queen, took the side of political leaders and heads of state in the Commonwealth who wanted sanctions placed on apartheid South Africa. That's one example. But there have been other ones more recently, inevitably, I suppose, because of how turbulent politics has been over the last 10 or 15 years. I mean, Gabby, one that obviously springs to mind, this is very recent stuff, really, is about Boris Johnson. The time Boris Johnson had in office was not easy for the relationship between the head of state and the prime minister. No, it wasn't. I mean, he got off to an unfortunate start by after his first meeting with the Queen coming out and saying she told me she didn't know why anyone would want the job. And it's a very strictly observed convention that nobody ever discusses what goes on in audience with the Queen. So that wasn't great. But more seriously, then he had to formally apologize to her, giving her misleading advice as to the legality of the perogying of parliament in just the first few months of being prime minister. But I think the sort of the low point of that relationship, I would have said, was obviously around the Duke of Edinburgh's funeral. I think everyone remembers that image of the Queen sitting alone in her funeral pew, observing social distance because it was always important to her that she did and she endured whatever her subjects did. And that goes back to her father keeping the whole family in London doing the blitz and so on and so on. You know, it's a very important symbol of the way the world's lives are enmeshed with national lives. And of course, we now know that on the evening of the funeral, Boris Johnson's staff were holding a drunken Rulkers leaving party in number 10 that breached lockdown rules. And so he had to publicly, although Johnson wasn't at that particular party, had to apologize to her for that. And I think that was a real, that was, I cannot imagine what it must have been like to have to make that apology. Gavin, here's Liz Truss. She's been prime minister for a matter of days. And now she's faced with this huge national moment that in some way she has to not only deal with, but in the midst of it, she has to somehow sort of give voice to quite profound things about the national mood, history, all of that. You know, in terms of the sort of the the owners that's put on prime ministers sort of rhetorically to speak and speak well, that's a huge, huge thing. What's going on now? And give me a sense of the responsibility that is and how that sits or might sit with her. So on one level, it feels slightly off to talk about what does this mean for politics, because it's a moment of sort of grief for the nation. But you're quite right, I think, to ask the question. I think this is quite a significant event for Liz Truss's premiership in two ways. First of all, she would have planned, I'm sure, a whole blitz of announcements and speeches and events during these initial period of her government. And a load of that is going to have to be put back during the period of mourning. There may be one or two things that have to carry on because of the the urgency of legislating for certain things. But secondly, as you said, it falls to the prime minister to try to speak for the country and how it's feeling about this event. I mean, you think back to the death of Princess Diana and I can still remember Tony Blair's words on that occasion. And that's I think I don't I don't mean this unkindly at all, but it's probably a challenge for her. If you were listing Liz's strengths and the areas where she maybe wasn't so strong, you probably wouldn't say she's a natural orator. So I think a lot of thought will be going into finding the right words and words that she's comfortable delivering, you know, that fit her style of speaking, but that properly capture the moment. The only other observation I would make is, you know, I think if you if you look at the energy announcement that that was almost immediately overshadowed yesterday, the government was in a great rush to do that. And this period is going to give them a little bit of time to privately think about things before we get back to anything that we would recognize as politics as usual. Let's just talk about the the run of events over the next days and weeks as far as parliament is concerned. I think parliament is sitting on Friday from midday to 10 p.m. And then it sits again on Saturday from 2 p.m. For members, I think, to pay tribute to the new king. But as Gavin's just said, politics, I mean, arguably, this will feel quite strange, I suppose, because we all know the frantic mood politics was in immediately before the queen died. But politics is going to be put on hold for what will feel like a very long time. Right, Gabby? Well, there are 10 days of official morning before state funeral, and that's the period where, you know, it's going to be almost like I've heard her before a budget in a way, you know, that time when everything's just put on hold. But you're and there's no sort of normal legislative business, but there's also going to be, I think, a suspension in what you would call campaigning politics. I mean, I think for Kirstal Mathers, there's going to be a consideration, which is, are you supposed to come out with all guns blazing against, you know, the prime minister now? Probably not. It feels a bit like when something terrible happens during an election campaign and sort of hostilities are suspended for a bit. There'll be a period of national coming together. People will want to talk about unifying things, not divisive things. So I think there'll probably be a sort of period of silence and respite from your position. But do you think that that may last for quite a while, mightn't it? In other words, the resumption of what we might understand as normal politics might be gradual, mightn't it? In the sense that you've got a coronation coming and all of that. So do you think this will go on longer than the period of morning? No. In this case, honestly, no, because I think there's so much going on. You know, there's a huge budget that has to come before the end of this month that explains exactly how the energy announcement that is going to be paid for, where the money is going to come from, how much it's going to cost. I mean, there's going to be a pent up rush of things that Liz Truss would have done. I think we're going to come back pretty quickly to normal politics. And there will be an impatience for that to happen because we might be, the rest of the world is getting on with things. Vladimir Putin and the Warren Putin in Ukraine and the sort of, you know, gas markets, are not, you know, also in abeyance just because our queen has died to be blunt. I want to talk now about the queen as a kind of symbolic connection between the United Kingdom now and the United Kingdom of seven years ago, the Second World War, and the queen really as a symbol of at least half, probably more than that of the 20th century. I mean, I think our lingering affinity or identification with that period has its good and bad sides. A lot of people quite cynically played it up in the midst of Brexit. But also in the midst of the kind of awful crises that we're faced with now, that idea of continuity and a link with the past gave a lot of people at least some solace and comfort. And in a very symbolic way, that connection has gone and that means something, doesn't it? I think so. Yes, I think I think she's a connection in in two ways. And I think for very many people in this country, really anyone up into their mid to late 70s, she's been there the whole of our lives. And it probably depends on what kind of person you are. I'm naturally quite a small C conservative person and the world changes very fast now. And having some things around you that are stable is kind of reassuring. So we've lost one of those kind of bedrocks in our lives, I guess. And then the other thing, John, I would say is that she's a sort of connection between us as well. I mean, imagine a world where we had a sort of President Johnson. And inevitably, a politician would be a very divisive figure. Some people would like them and some people wouldn't like them. But I think Her Majesty managed by staying out of politics to be at least for the vast majority of people. There are obviously some who take a different view, but for the vast majority figure, a kind of unifying figure for the country, someone who everybody could kind of identify with and are part of Britishness in that sense. Yeah. I mean, I'm a Republican. I disagree with the institution of monarchy. But I can see and understand and almost agree with exactly what you're saying. And I certainly think she was very, very good at expressing that important aspect, really, really important aspect of her role. The obvious one that springs to mind is just after that first lockdown started. And she was really, she was really good. I mean, let's be honest, what she said on telly in that statement was very, very well done. And without being too heavy handed about it, the fact that it ended with we'll meet again made all that stuff I referenced a moment ago very, very real. We should take comfort that while we may have more still to endure, better days will return. We will be with our friends again. We will be with our families again. We will meet again. And although the Britain of 1940 relative to now is completely unrecognizable, we're an utterly different country. There's no question of that. We kind of do believe, and there are good reasons why we believe, that there's something essential that runs between those two periods. And she was very, very good at positioning herself as the representation of exactly that stuff. Gaby. All of that is true, except that I think the brilliance of the Queen was constancy and change. She, you know, the monarchy, if you think about the sort of evolution that the institution of monarchy has undergone since 1952, the changes she sort of had to sort of deal with relatively graciously. You know, her father was Emperor of India, you know, and she's the queen of Retreatment Empire, the queen of, you know, the queen that presides over growing independence, changing relationship between the Commonwealth and the UK. She's the queen who dealt with sort of the opening up of the monarchy to sort of more media to, you know, I think back to the 2012 Olympics and that, you know, sheer astonishment when the Queen did the James Bond skin. You think, by God, that's the actual Queen, you know, that's the actual Queen is just, you know, taking part in this thing that's, you know, fundamentally unserious, but rather joyous. And there's no way, you know, 20 years ago, the morning would have done that. And I think the chance for Prince Charles is going to be to continue that evolutionary path to adapt to changing times. OK, we'll talk about him in a minute. But there is something really because of the fact that the times we're faced with all of a sudden feel so profoundly worrying, right? I mean, this is a very, very turbulent time, whether you're talking about the energy crisis, war in Ukraine that largely caused it, Brexit and all its after effects, climate and all that, you know, I mean, compared to the world of 25 years ago, say the 1990s, this is a much more sort of fretful reality we're faced with. And then the loss of that symbol of continuity inevitably makes it feel all the more fretful and worrying. That's true, isn't it? It's definitely true. The Bond sketch at the opening of the Olympics, to me that, I mean, it's only 10 years ago, but it feels like a completely different world. It was kind of the high point of, you know, if I think of my life and how the UK I felt was performing in the world and it's standing in the world, that felt like a real high point. That was the end of the long 1990s, wasn't it? That was the country at ease with itself. And that's why the Queen was so perfect with that, because you just thought she is relaxed as well. And we all are. Yeah, we were wrong about that, it turns out. But it is true, isn't it? As a matter of the most awful coincidence, the Queen's death in the midst of this sort of awful heightened sense of crisis we're in the midst of, it feels like it's part of the same moment. I think it compounds people's sense of suddenly emerging, blinking at this new world that doesn't make much sense. Yes, I think, as you say, the country is just going through a really difficult period at the moment. And this would have been a very sad day whenever it had happened. But to happen at this moment feels particularly painful. Gabby mentioned the new King Charles III a moment ago. Now, he certainly thus far has been a very, very different senior royal from his mother in terms of the sort of intersection between his public persona and politics. Here he is talking to the BBC's Justin Roeller, ahead of the global COP26 summit. What we're doing with our own economy is to disrupt nature's economy by not following that circular pattern. We've created a linear one which imagines you can go on forever, creating ever more growth and ever more, you know, changing everything. You should be without understanding that actually you have to fit together with nature. So let me ask you this. Is our government doing enough to make these things happen? I couldn't possibly comment. The Queen would never, ever have spoken like that. I mean, that's a plain fact, it seems to me. And you wonder now that he's the King. I mean, that's not suddenly going to stop, is it? We are going to be in a slightly more, what's the word, sort of choppy, slightly unpredictable phase of the existence of the monarchy and its relationship with politics, Gabby. I think it's going to have to change to some extent. And he's not an idiot. You know, he does, I think he does realise that, you know, being King is very different from being the heir and that there's a freedom to articulate, well, not much freedom, but he has had some freedom to articulate personal interests and views over the last, you know, he has the I wouldn't expect him to continue doing that. But on the other hand, you can't forget, you can't unhear the things that we know he thinks. And occasionally, you know, that would happen during the Queen's reign. You would think, you know, I remember it, for example, when New Labour was wanting to ban hunting, you know, you she didn't have to say it, but you felt that the Queen might have had a different view about country sports, shall we say, than Tony Blair did. And it was hard to sort of unsee that. And I think that will be the tension. I called him Prince Charles, I think a minute ago. He's not Prince Charles anymore. He's King Charles. And then, you know, the speed with which that happens, you know, the the Queen dies. And literally, it's long as the king is hard for us to get used to, never mind for him. And there is going to be some feeling of his way into that new role. And there is perhaps going to be some reinterpretation of that role. But I don't think the country will accept a political monarch. The whole point is that, you know, the monarchy has these extraordinary powers to dissolve parliament, to invite people to farm the government. And we tolerate those powers in a way because they're not used. And because we do not somehow imagine that the monarch would use them out of their own, you know, partisan interest. But you can't sustain that fantasy, as it were, if it's very clear what the monarch thinks about any given issue of the day. Gavin, were you ever sort of directly aware of Prince Charles's occasional, the then Prince Charles's occasional incursions into politics? No more than you would have been in the public domain. I mean, obviously, there's there's plenty of evidence on the record of right of letters he's written to ministers at various points. I agree with what Gabby said. I think the monarch cannot directly intrude into party politics. But Gabby was just eulogising over how Queen Elizabeth developed the monarchy, changed it, adapted it over time. And I think King Charles will do the same. But there are there are limits to what he can do as monarch that where maybe he had a bit more freedom for maneuver as the Prince of Wales. I mean, I do think on environmentalism, it's right to say he was right to sound warnings on this issue. But there are, you know, once you're once you're in the position of monarch, you can't intrude into the party political debate. So in other words, it would drive some of your former conservative colleagues mad. But would you expect therefore, now he's king, that at least occasionally he will talk about the climate emergency and what it demands of politics and politicians. And the government, the government may want him to do that sometimes. I mean, it's worth remembering. Trust will. It's worth remembering that the government encouraged members of the Royal Family to participate in the COP26 conference. It was useful. And I have to be very careful what I say here. There are occasions when governments have found Her Majesty's Queen Elizabeth's historical perspective and the respect she was held by some other world leaders of use. It doesn't mean she can function like a head of government. But there are definitely occasions when she's meeting with somebody else. And I'm sure Prime Ministers will have spoken to her and said, this is the this is what we're trying to achieve here. So sometimes having members of the Royal Family speak on issues that are not part of politically contentious but are still small political can be useful to a government. But I agree with what Gabby said. King Charles is going to have to behave differently now he is King Charles than he was able to do when he was Prince Charles. I actually think the climate may be one of the issues of less tension in that, I mean, when he started talking about it, Prince Charles was out on a sort of a bit more of a limb. You know, this was a very partisan question. And I think now, you know, you were still in an era of climate deniers versus, you know, and arguing about where the global warming was real. Whereas I think it's easier for the world, you know, the Duke of Cambridge is ventured into the same territory now. And I think it's because it's easier. There's a sort of certain amount of settled consensus that, yes, climate change is real. Yes, it's bad. Yes, we're supposed to do something about it. Yes, we're committed to net zero. And, you know, none of that is any more controversial territory. I mean, obviously, there are clearly going to be, you know, issues about how we reach net zero, where we may have a view or may not have a view. But I think some of this thing has been taken out of that. I would watch for any kind of clash over issues around farming and agriculture policy. And I think also there's some really difficult ground to be negotiated between the palace and government about our relationship with the Commonwealth and issues like apologies for slavery, reparations for slavery. You know, all of that stuff is really political territory, and yet territory that the Royal Family cannot avoid. I mean, this is an interesting juncture for the Commonwealth, certainly in the sense that, as we all know, many leaders of Commonwealth countries have been making quite loud noises about moving away from the idea that the British monarch is their head of state and so on. And I suppose because just this is a is a breakpoint of some description, that stuff is likely to intensify. Yeah, I think so. I think there will probably I don't think it will happen immediately out of respect for mourning for Her Majesty, but I'm almost certain that there are some places around the world that delayed having this debate out of respect to Queen Elizabeth. And once a reasonable amount of time has passed, you may find that debate beginning in a few places. And those are decisions for those countries to take, and it needn't be problematic to the future of the Commonwealth, because obviously there are plenty of countries in the Commonwealth that for whom Prince Charles is not the head of state. But there is an enduring historical connection that both sides value. Just to finish, I just thought I'd ask you both a fairly straightforward question, which is sort of how you feel in this moment. I mean, as I said earlier, I'm not an ardent royalist, but the sense of this as a big moment in British history. And as I said earlier, just because of this awful coincidence of timing, this feeling I have that some symbol, a very important symbol of our continuity with the past is no longer there. And so it feels like we're being sort of shoved all the harder into this very uncertain, worrying world that none of us have really got the map for. I suppose that's what I feel like. I've had this sense since 2008 that this is a very, very different world. But I suppose because monarchy is meant to be symbolic, that feeling really, really, really feels very profound now. Gabby, how do you feel in this moment? A very striking thing yesterday, the Queen started. I mean, that alone is very, very sobering. I've been surprised by how sad I felt, actually, thinking I don't know her. She doesn't play any part in my everyday life. She was 96. It's not a surprise. I had thought we've all been expecting this moment to come, and I won't feel a great deal when it does. And I was surprised by how sad I was and how shocked, really, even though it's not shocking. And I think my phone was buzzing for an hour after the news came in with friends saying exactly the same thing about what's up. Why am I crying? I didn't know the Queen. And somehow you are kind of caught up in this upswell of national grief that I'm sure is partly composed of people remembering other griefs and other losses that they've had. A lot of people have been bereaved over the last few years of the pandemic, and a lot of people will have had that long drive up the motorway to the bedside kind of thing. It evokes all sorts of personal memories for people. But it's also one of those few moments where you feel the same thing is happening to all of us at the same time, which very happily happens very rarely and kind of fairly fractured will be living. Gaby. I think Gaby's last point is how I feel. It's a common experience. The country's a strange thing. There's lots of differences between us. We're divided on all sorts of ways. But she was one of the things that bound us together and a sort of symbol of constancy in a very rapidly changing world. And I was thinking last night when I was going to bed, I was sort of thinking about it. And to me, the two sort of memories that stood out are both recent ones. One was her sitting in the chapel on her own at Prince Philip's funeral and providing such a contrast with the way ministers and the people, prime minister and the people around him behaved. And I think more generally, she's provided during her life an example of duty and service that so many of her ministers have not been able to match. And then the second one was from the Placidon Ghibli celebrations, the sketch with Paddington Bear. Perhaps you would like a marmalade sandwich. I always keep one for emergencies. So do I. I keep mine in here. For later. It's quite hard to say what is Britishness, because actually people all around the world are basically the same. But there was something quintessentially British about that. I think those two very contrasting images of her tell you something about the person. It was also the most brilliant piece of political signalling that Paddington thing. Because you could either see it as, you know, oh, how lovely. Here's a great-grandmother doing a thing for children with a children's character. But for some people, particularly in the Jewish community, Paddington Bear represents refugees, because his creator Michael Bond has always said that the idea came from the kinder transport into a children coming to the UK to escape the Nazis. But also I didn't realise until I was reading a biography of President Zelensky recently. In Ukraine, Zelensky is best known for having voiced Paddington in the Ukrainian version of the films. And you would have, you know, depending on where you were watching that skit in the world, you would have had very different feelings about what message she was trying to convey. And I don't think the Queen would ever have been specific about what message she was trying to convey. But that was the point. She allowed you to read into her what you needed to read into her. It's interesting, isn't it? Talking about those sort of principles or qualities of duty and service and all the rest of it. I mean, it might be a bit sentimental to look back to the politics of sort of 30 or 40 years ago and say there was a bit more of that around. But I think there probably was. And I think that's another reason, I think, why her death feels like such a profound moment. Anyway, thank you all for listening. Most importantly, thank you to Gavin and Gabby for joining us this morning. Thank you, Beau. Thank you. Pleasure. It only falls to me to say that this episode was produced by Frankie Toby. The music is by Axel Kukutie and the executive producers are Mas Etahaj and Karl Jackson. This is The Guardian.