 The Guardian. More than a year after the first coronavirus case was detected in the UK, the government finally catches up with other countries on travel restrictions. I'm Jessica Elgott, Deputy Political Editor of The Guardian, and this is Politics Weekly. Anyone who lies on the passenger locator form and tries to conceal that they've been in a country on the red list in the 10 days before arrival here will face a prison sentence of up to 10 years. In response to the new Covid variants entering the UK, the Health Secretary Matt Hancock announced in the comments yesterday that travellers arriving from coronavirus hotspots, who refused to adhere to the new restrictions, could face £10,000 fines and jail sentences of up to 10 years. The move might seem extreme, but given how long we've known about variants cropping up since the new year, many are asking, is it too little, too late? Over the last few weeks we've seen the UK government grapple with how many restrictions it should copy and adopt from elsewhere in the world. I wanted to hear how people looking from the outside in feel the UK has handled its pandemic response, and later on my colleagues from Europe and Asia tell me more. Later on the Community Secretary Robert Jenrick has expected to announce billions of pounds in extra support to address the cladding crisis that was exposed after the Grenfell Tower Fire in 2017. This influx of money will be welcomed by many, although some are suggesting developers should pay. Will it be enough to help hundreds of thousands once again feel safe in their own homes? On top of that, the Prime Minister managed, ever so slightly, to see off a fresh backbench rebellion over Britain's trade approach to countries suspected of committing genocide. And that's all in this week's Politics Weekly. But first, all eyes are on hotel rooms, mainly those next to Heathrow, as the details of the hotel quarantine scheme have been released. And to discuss this and much more, I'm joined by my colleague John Crace, the Guardian's parliamentary sketch writer. John, I'm chatting to you at home where there seems to be some tree surgery going on outside, which is a good start to our chat. But we finally got the details of this quarantine hotel policy. It feels like we've been talking about this for weeks and it's been so long in the making. The first question is, I guess, is it just too little too late? Well, it certainly feels that way. We're talking about a policy that other countries have successfully implemented a year ago. And we've been talking about doing the same, but failing to do anything. And now we seem to have a list of 33 Red List countries, but it doesn't even appear to be that inclusive of all the countries that are meant to be on it. And then we've got the kind of bonkers 10 years prison sentence. Yeah, I mean, that is, you know, quite a draconian move. And in a way, I guess you have this idea of 10 years in prison, if you're seen breaking the rules, I mean, I think you probably have to have a fair amount of aggravating circumstances to be handed that sentence, but you have that sort of move that's going to upset a lot of Tories. And then you also have the fact that the hotel quarantine policy doesn't apply to all countries. So it both you seem like you end up a bit with the worst of both worlds, and that you have this kind of PR stunt show a force in the 10 year jail sentence, which doesn't actually ever going to be handed down probably. And then big gaps in the system that do allow new variants to get through. I mean, who is this? Who is this policy actually aimed at, John? That's a very good point. I have no idea. I mean, it seems to be the government has recognised that it's made an error in not doing something. It's not an inclusive list. So I mean, people can still be arriving from countries that have nasty variants of Covid, but aren't on the red list. And I mean, with the 10 year prison sentence, it's not even clear if there's an offence that they can be charged with. So what I wondered was whether it was a sort of dead cat thing, get everybody talking about the 10 year prison sentence, and then maybe not think too much about why the policy has been put in place and why it's not actually that effective. Yeah, I think that's probably right. We know the government's putting a lot of eggs in the vaccination programme basket. It's clearly the UK's biggest asset. But a lot of Tory MPs are kind of bringing up this idea of if we've constantly got to protect the vaccinated population against new variants, then when can these travel restrictions end? Is it only when the whole world is vaccinated or is it just has to be a stopgap? How will it actually work? Again, that seems to be totally unclear. I mean, judging by what Matt Hancock was saying in the Commons yesterday, we're going to have to put everything on hold until we're vaccinated against various variants. I mean, he was very much putting the dampers on the idea of once everybody over 50 has had their two jabs, then we'll be back to normal. And the thing is that it's also there seems to be so much unjoined up government today. It's really hard to know if sort of Matt Hancock was actually just freelancing at that particular point. And it is really government policy to wait until, you know, a booster jab that will be effective against the South African and South American variants, or whether, you know, there is some kind of plan. I mean, because I think what it is clear is that the South African and the South American variants aren't the last variants we're going to see. So, I mean, we could be in this sort of perpetual state of limbo, I suppose. Yeah, you've always had a pretty keen interest in Matt Hancock in your sketches. I suppose he's often the minister, you know, sent out to bat. And you've noticed in recent weeks, you think he's kind of got his tiggerish energy back. He's smiling again because of the success in rolling out the vaccine. Is there anything coming down the track that could wipe that smile off again? And did you think these travel restrictions or a sort of prolonged lockdown might do that? Well, I mean, Matt Hancock and I sort of seem to be sort of locked into this sort of very unhealthy dysfunctional relationship with one another, whereby I kind of find myself having to sketch him, you know, some twice, sometimes even three times a week. And I certainly think that the vaccine program, I think it probably, when it took that, it's taken me by surprise how effective it's been. And I get the feeling it's probably taken the government by surprise as well. I wouldn't be at all surprised if when Boris had said the top four tears will be vaccinated by February the 15th, Matt Hancock didn't inwardly groan and think, oh, God, there's a target, another target I'm going to miss. But I mean, as for what's coming down, I mean, I think the variants are going to be his biggest headache. To go back to what we were talking about earlier, it's then a question of when do you actually release restrictions? I mean, just presumably you can't lock down the country indefinitely. I think, you know, having got it so wrong previously, I mean, Matt Hancock will be really tense about when to release and to take his foot off the brakes. Like conservative governments battling hotel bookings. But we've heard a little bit more from Labour this week. Rachel Reeves did a big speech on Monday, which I think feels to me apart from the shadow chancellor, Anneliese Dodds, the sort of first big intervention we've seen from another cabinet minister. Taxpayer money, irresponsibly and unforgivably wasted. Rich donors given jobs for life in the House of Lords. Dodgy contract. She did this big speech about cronyism and taking back control of public contracts and criticising the Tories for handing contracts out to their mates during the pandemic. And we've said for a while that the shadow cabinet really needs to sort of start making itself known to the public. How do you rate Rachel Reeves and, you know, is she the sort of strongest performer that Keir Starmer's got in a cabinet which we don't know that much about still? I think she is very good. I've always rated her. And I think the cronyism thing is one that does stand up. I mean, some of the heat was slightly taken away by the fact that Kate Bingham as chief exec of the Joint Committee on Vaccinations and the Vaccines Task Force has done so spectacularly well. But we shouldn't sort of forget that sort of Dido Harding had a sort of absolute nightmare when she came in as head of test and trace. And there have been numerous other stories of Tory donors that have had PPE contracts that they haven't fulfilled. All the goods that they've supplied haven't been suitable for the task in hand. So I think it's been a good move on Labour's part. And I mean, I think, you know, Rachel Reeves is as good as any of them. If nothing else, it feels like the speech was the first shows of a kind of concrete Labour policy. And those are going to need to see more from this, aren't they? Especially maybe in the run up to the budget. Well, yeah, I mean, in a way, I kind of feel slightly sorry for Labour at the moment, because in the middle of a pandemic, I mean, government appears to have all but stopped. I think there is a certain amount of feeling that Labour wants to be seen or need and indeed needs to be seen to be supportive when the government actually gets various bits right and not just generally just be, you know, criticise the government for everything. So I think the, you know, Labour has had to kind of pick and choose its moments. And I think cronyism is a very good way in. So there was another attack on the government on Tuesday, but this time it was coming from the Tory backbenchers, some who were really splitting blood over this trade bill, where some Tory MPs arranged a vote on the back of an amendment passed by the Lords, which would have given the UK courts a role in determining whether a country is committing genocide. The problem was that there seems to be this bit of a parliamentary stitch up, meaning that all those MPs who wanted to rebel would have to also back a separate Labour amendment. It is all quite complicated, but it's really set off some very bad feeling in parliament, hasn't it, John? Well, yeah, I mean, my understanding is that it is only a court that can decide whether a genocide has been committed. And, you know, the amendment that the Tories wanted to go through was that parliament would need to have a vote after the Supreme Court or High Court ruling seemed self-evidently fair. But I mean, you hit the nail on the head. What's at stake here is a Chinese trade deal that we seem to desperately need. The government is doing everything in its power to make sure that backbenchers don't get there a chance to kind of put an oar in. But in the meantime, as you say, there is a lot of discontented backbench Tory MPs. I mean, I think the fudge that the Foreign Affairs Select Committee can say, oh, we're not very happy about this trade deal because of a genocide. Basically, they can do that now anyway. Lord Alton, who is the crossbench peer who introduced the genocide amendment to the trade bill, has said that he's going to try and reintroduce it to the Lord. So it'll probably come back next week. Yeah, then we'll have the same rowel over again and the government might not be able to avoid it. And that brings us to Wednesday. So it's been a bit of a busy week. We're expected to hear from Robert Jenrick about billions of pounds to try and fix those major safety issues in blocks that were raised after the Grenfell Tower disaster in 2017. I mean, it's been a long time in the making. Another thing that's been even longer in the making and sent people bankrupt and suicidal and made people live in unlivable, unmortgable, unsellable homes. Surely the government must have got the message by now that it just needs to make this money available, even if it then tries to claw it back from developers. I mean, you would have thought so. But as we were talking about with the border and the hotel quarantines, their ability to do too little too late should never be underestimated. I mean, there is a rumour going round that they're only going to give money to people who live in homes that are taller than 18 metres, which would seem to me to be just totally unfair. I mean, I don't know why you would do that. The government has spent $400 billion on a rescue package for the economy during the pandemic to not be able to find an extra $2 billion or $3 billion here or there to cost a cladding. I mean, don't forget, I mean, Grenfell was three and a half years ago and they promised at the time that they would deal with it as a matter of urgency. And all we've seen so far is total delay. Between Covid and everything else, there's an awful lot to chew over this week. John Crace, thank you ever so much for joining me. Thank you. After the break, I'll be speaking to two correspondents in Paris and Taipei about how the UK's Covid response plan has been viewed by countries around the world. We'll be right back. Welcome back to Politics Weekly. I'm Jessica Elgott. Now, as we mentioned in the first half of the show, the UK government has announced from the 15th of February that people entering the United Kingdom from 33 countries on the red list would need to complete a 10-day hotel quarantine stay. Each person will have to pay £1,750, which is more expensive than its Australian and New Zealand counterparts. This action, however, comes almost a year after countries in the Asia Pacific decided to do the very same thing. And there are concerns that picking and choosing countries with variants rather than a one-size-fits-all policy just won't work. Is the UK government doing the right thing by straying from other countries' standards? And it made me think more about how the UK is viewed by other countries and what both our neighbours and those in distant lands are also struggling with to combat the pandemic. To discuss this, I spoke to Helen Davidson, the Guardian's reporter based in Taipei in Taiwan, and John Henley, the Guardian's Europe correspondent who's in Paris. Helen and John, thank you so much for joining me. Helen, I thought I'd start off by asking you a little bit about your personal experience of hotel quarantine, which I think you did last year in Taipei when you moved over from Sydney. Tell us a little bit about what that was like. So I moved from one of the most heavily restricted borders to another, which involved an enormous amount of paperwork. So firstly, because I'm an Australian citizen, I needed the Australian Government's permission to leave the country. That's a policy that's been in place since about March or April last year, and it's still in place. And I also had to have an entry permit for Taiwan because their borders are also closed. I had a negative COVID test result, and a quarantine hotel booked on the other side. And if I didn't have any of that, they wouldn't have let me on the plane. It was sort of a pretty uneventful flight. But once we arrived in Taipei, they took us off the plane, lined us up for temperature checks. We had to queue to register for the quarantine monitoring systems. Taiwan's response is very technology based. So they're using your phone signal and your proximity to Wi-Fi and that sort of thing to make sure that you're staying in quarantine if you're doing it at home. For us, we're in hotels, so it's much easier to keep an eye on us. But it was a really smooth process. Wow. I mean, that must have been quite an experience. I think the main thing I think we want to talk about is how have other countries seen the way the UK has responded? And since you've been in Taipei, and also perhaps you could give us a perspective as well on the Australian press, how do media outlets paint a picture of how the UK has handled this pandemic? I think people are pretty horrified seeing the way that the UK has handled it. There are such close ties between the UK and Australia and the UK and Hong Kong in particular. The way it's been reported, I think, is that the UK has tried to beat the virus without doing the things that everybody else has accepted that they have to do. And that's border restrictions, tough lockdowns at the start, mask wearing, hotel quarantine, all these things that some places like Taiwan, China, Hong Kong, Australia have been doing for more than a year now. John, the same across Europe, which obviously has experienced much higher death tolls, much stricter lockdowns for more prolonged periods than other parts of the world. But how does the media across Europe portray how things are going in the United Kingdom? And particularly how do they see how Boris Johnson has handled things? You're right to highlight Boris Johnson. I think that the general perception of him is... Certainly during Brexit, it was, well, this is just an insane and crazy project. The only reason you would be doing this is for ideological reasons, really. Boris Johnson is a great lover of slogans. And the continent saw that through the Brexit process. And it was sort of the get Brexit done and the take back control and make Britain great again and all this kind of stuff. And I think the feeling on the continent, despite obviously, as I said, notwithstanding the fact that there are several countries in Europe that have suffered terrible death tolls, the feeling is that you can't actually fight a pandemic with those kind of slogans. And I think the general feeling is that the decisions that had to be taken were taken too late and they weren't tough enough. Let's talk about one of the really key differences, I suppose, which is still happening between the UK's approach and many countries in Asia and in Australia and in New Zealand, is the hotel quarantine policy, which is coming in here from the 15th of February, although only from very high risk countries, particularly those who might be at risk of spreading new variants. And the UK government has been consulting, I think, with Australia and New Zealand for some advice on this. But Helen, what do you think about this idea of only quarantining people from particular hotspot countries? And obviously, lots of countries across Asia haven't taken that approach. How do you think that will be viewed? Yeah, so a lot of people are starting to talk about this, particularly here in Taiwan, where the hotel quarantine system is so strict and so regimented. I think there are sort of two main reactions to the UK's plan. One is, as you pointed out, that it is only applying to people from particular countries as opposed to applying to everyone, but giving exemptions to people who have come from a country where there's little or no virus there. As people are talking about that as being a bit backwards. Well, the other reaction is that the rate of infection within the UK is so high that it seems strange that there's this sudden emphasis on protecting against the influx of new cases. And that makes sense when you're looking at new strains like the South African, wanting to stop the South African strain coming in and that sort of thing. But there is this sort of confusion about why the UK is suddenly so worried about people bringing the virus in when they've had a year of essentially free travel. And now the UK itself is one of the worst places with the virus. John, do you think that European nations are likely to consider even tougher border measures given that the new strains that are emerging? It's difficult, isn't it, to erect borders in between European nations particularly, but that they have some countries more than others have taken those kinds of steps? Yes. I mean, I think that you need to draw a distinction between, as you say, between the EU's external borders and the internal borders. As regards to the external borders, then the EU maintains this list of safe countries. There are only about a half a dozen countries on it. And from those countries, you are allowed to enter the bloc from those countries without a negative COVID test or any requirement to quarantine, but from literally everywhere else in the world. Not only do you require a very specific reason to travel, on top of that, you need a recent negative test. For most, you're coming in from many other countries. And in many EU countries, you also need to take a second kind of lateral flow rapid test when you arrive. And you need to sort of commit to quarantine if either of those tests shows anything wrong. And it's also starting to become the case within the EU. And the EU has set up this kind of colour-coded system. What they want to do, what the EU is particularly keen to do, is to avoid what happened during the first wave last spring when countries kind of unilaterally started closing the internal EU borders. And that was a major problem for freight transport and cross-border workers. And it really threatened the sort of functioning of the whole single market. So they want to avoid that. But there are now, coming into France, coming into the Netherlands, from high-risk EU countries, it's almost the same as if you're coming in from a non-EU country. You need a very good reason to travel, and you need a PCR test and a lateral flow test when you arrive. So the borders are definitely closing. Let's talk a little bit more broadly about the way that testings function and vaccinations. And this idea of a zero COVID strategy, which some politicians in the UK have been arguing that the UK needs to adopt. We're an extremely long way from being able to pursue that strategy so far. But Helen, in places like Hong Kong and China, it's been such a strict system that people will, there's been reports that Hong Kong police, for example, lock people into their homes until they're tested. If they're refused, they're fined. In China, obviously, you've got to scan QR codes in pretty much everywhere you go so that your movements can be tracked. How do people feel about this approach, which I think is probably something that would not be accepted in the UK for good or bad reasons, compliance, it hasn't been nearly as good as in some countries. Are people happy with that approach from governments across Asia? In China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, people are much more willing, I think, to do what's required of them when it comes to these sort of restrictions. But having said that, there have definitely been missteps or overreaches or particular methods that have drawn criticism that have really upset people or alarmed people. You mentioned the Hong Kong authorities' new method of testing people. That's been pretty controversial. The short version is that they're doing these ambush-style lockdowns of buildings or residential buildings or blocks. The police are showing up with no notice at all, and there's some pretty alarming footage of squads of police officers running up a street towards a building and then cordoning it off with the police tape. Then everyone who's inside, now that includes residents, anyone who happens to be a guest of those residents. If there are shops in that building, it includes the employees and the customers of those shops. Everybody has to stay put until everyone is tested. That could be one to three days, which is obviously pretty alarming if you've just walked into a shop to have a quick browse and now you're suddenly locked in there for three days. It's caused quite a bit of consternation, and it's also raised questions about the effectiveness and the cost-effectiveness of it as well. These are incredibly resource-heavy operations. They are not returning that much, so these testing drives are returning only a handful, sometimes zero results. The government's saying that's a good thing because it means that no one's positive, but epidemiologists that I've spoken to have pointed out that that's not necessarily true. This has been a pretty controversial strategy in Hong Kong. It's also coming off the back of very, very low levels of trust in the government there. What Hong Kong people will tell you is that their success has been largely driven by the community, that they felt the government was quite slow to start and was too deferential to China. China there is a high level of compliance, but in the same token, there's not a whole lot of choice there either. The QR codes, the health apps, there's been talk of them becoming a permanent part of China's health and tech apparatus, but we'll see what happens with that as well. John, obviously, it's famously the UK's test and trace system has not been exactly world beating. The testing has generally gone okay apart from a few hiccups, but the tracing part of it has generally been seen to be abysmal. That has been the case, that test and trace across Europe, and I'm generalising obviously, but France has seen problems with its system and with its apps. There has been plenty of cases in other countries as well where they're setting up those kinds of systems has been difficult. Do you think this is a general problem that's not unique to the UK or do you think the UK has been particularly bad at it? Yeah, I don't think it is unique to UK. I think the sorry truth with test and trace is that it's just simply, it becomes physically impossible or at least extremely difficult once the caseload goes beyond a certain point. I think the prime example of that is Germany, which had a remarkably successful first wave last spring and a very efficient test and trace system. Then it all went pear shaped after the summer holidays and Germany has had a dreadful, and it's still in pretty strict lockdown and caseload is coming down. Now infection numbers are coming down, but they're still at relatively very high levels and under those conditions test and trace becomes very, very complicated. It's worked much better in countries where they've really managed to hold the numbers down to a relatively low level. So I'm thinking particularly relatively, well not small countries, but countries with relatively small populations. For example, Finland has a very effective test and trace system, Iceland, these kinds of places. Adam, to talk a little bit about vaccinations, obviously the biggest topic in the UK, how do Australians feel about not really starting at any vaccination program yet? Obviously, Scott Morrison seems quite hesitant to get those things moving. I think they're taking advantage of the fact that there is a low level of infection in Australia and the idea that having a significant outbreak is going to be far more damaging to the economy than playing it safe for a little bit longer. The government did initially say it was going to wait for more evidence about the vaccines before starting the program. They didn't want to rush through the approvals process like other places did. But then there was a pretty significant outbreak over Christmas in New South Wales around Sydney. And so that timeline sped up. Having said that, it's still, I think the current plan is that it might begin in March, but it's still a very slow rollout. And I think the Australian case, it's one of those interesting cases where like Taiwan, their success has meant that they're actually at a slight disadvantage with the vaccine because there is net urgency. So it makes perfect sense to me to concentrate on vaccinating populations where the virus is rampant because you need to get that under control for many, many reasons. One, to stop people dying, two, to also stop these further mutations coming out. But obviously people in these places like Australia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, where there isn't that much presence of the virus, they're still scared of it. There are still people coming in, there are still cases popping up and outbreaks. And so there is, they would like the vaccine program to start quite quickly. And at the same time, they're also dealing with some pretty high profile myths and disinformation campaigns around vaccines from some high profile people, including members of parliament and a celebrity chef. So I mean, neither of these people have much credibility left, but they still got large audiences. And so there is, I think, a sense in the health community as well to get the vaccination program rolling before the anti-vax campaign, for whatever better phrase, can sort of take a hold as well. John, we've talked quite a lot about Europe and vaccinations over the last few weeks, but why do you think that in the UK, I think one of the benefits there's been is that the UK population, apart from a few kind of high profile cases, is pretty keen to get the vaccine. There's not much vaccine skepticism, we hear quite a lot about it, but generally speaking, the UK population is pretty keen to get it. That's not the case in some European countries, is it? Which is why there's been some concern about what President Macron has been saying, because France is one of the more vaccine skeptical countries in Europe. How much do you think that affects things? I think it is affecting things. I mean, whether that's by accident or design, I'm not really sure. I think that the poor idea that was essential for the EU to procure vaccines as a block, I think there's very little doubt that that was really the only way that Europe could have gone. I think it would be unimaginable to have the 27 members of the European Union sort of fighting each other to get vaccine supplies. So I think at the end of the day, it may have been slower and more cautious than countries like the UK and particularly Israel, I suppose, and to some extent the US. But that's not necessarily as... I mean, I completely take on board Helen's point that the point is to save lives. But it is a fact that the EU... I mean, it's secured 2.3 billion doses from six different manufacturers. They are on their way. They're taking time because the EU signed late because of production, sort of shortfalls and problems and what have you. But this slow rollout, to come back to the point that you mentioned, Jess, is not necessarily a bad thing. I mean, I spoke to a pollster last week who'd done a major sort of pan-European poll across all 27 member states for the European Commission, which found, for example, that all those three-quarters... Across the all 27, three-quarters of the European population said, yes, they would be happy to be inoculated. But only... I mean, less than 30% wanted it this year, and less than 30% of those wanted it even in the slightly longer term future. So there is very much a kind of hurry up and wait about this. And I think that the EU is looking... Many Europeans are looking at what's happening in Britain with awe in terms of, wow, that's pretty amazing to be able to administer that many vaccines to that many doses, to that many people so fast. But they're not yet... I mean, they might come to do so, but they're not yet looking at it with envy because safety and sort of guarantees and liability questions with the manufacturers and this kind of thing, I think are more important. That's so fascinating. Thank you so much, Helen and John, for a really interesting discussion. Thank you. No problem. Thank you. Pleasure. And that's all from us this week. In the US, everyone is focused on the Senate impeachment trial, currently trying to determine whether or not Donald Trump was responsible for the insurrection attempt on the Capitol on January 6th. On Friday's episode of Politics Weekly Extra, Jonathan Friedland speaks to Professor Sarah Binder of the Brookings Institute about what the likely outcome will be when this political trial comes to a close. So make sure to look out for that on the same feed you found us. But for now, I want to thank our guests, John Crace, Helen Davidson and John Henley, the producers at Amy Leaver-Vitz and Danielle Stephens. I'm Jessica Elgott. Please look after yourselves and thanks as always for listening.