 This is The Guardian. Just how many lockdown parties would it take for Boris Johnson to resign? I'm Heather Stewart, political editor of The Guardian and this is Politics Weekly. Mr Speaker, I want to apologise. Boris Johnson today apologised for attending a Bring Your Own Booze party held in Downing Street in May 2020, at a time when the British public were only allowed to meet one other person outside. Is he now going to do the decent thing and resign? Despite calls for his resignation, the Prime Minister is hiding behind senior civil servant Sue Grey, who's investigating a string of dodgy gatherings in Downing Street. But his own MPs had made clear to him they expected answers at today's Prime Minister's side. So what did they make of it? And is Johnson's very future as Prime Minister now hanging in the balance? And to add to the government's problems, a cost of living crisis is heading our way, with 2022 being nicknamed the Year of the Squeeze. But where is the Chancellor as all of this unfolds? That's all in this week's Politics Weekly. The scandals surrounding Downing Street simply won't go away, as an email leaked to ITV News this week revealed that Downing Street staff had been invited to a socially distanced party by Johnson's Principal Private Secretary Martin Reynolds during the first lockdown in 2020. I've just watched a highly anticipated Prime Minister's questions and wanted to talk to Guardian columnist Gabby Hensliffe about what she thinks of this mess. Gabby, it's lovely to have you. What were you doing at about the time of this party, not party, in May 2020? I imagine not wandering out into your garden and accidentally involving yourself in a drink stew. I was doing basically nothing, because nothing was basically what you were allowed to do. Although I do remember that on May 21st it was a really good friend of mine's birthday and she lives nearby and we worked out that if we stuck garden chairs on the opposite side of the road outside my house we could have a glass of wine within shouting distance of each other and be within the law. And I remember doing that in the sunshine but even then thinking quite nervously, you know, is this okay? And what will people think? I've got elderly neighbours, I don't want them to think I'm not taking the rules seriously or that I'd put them at risk somehow. Little did I know, however, what was going on in number 10? So I can't imagine how people feel, to be honest, if they were holding funerals on Zoom that day or, you know, giving birth alone or seeing their grandparents through a window. So frankly, it's that sense that ordinary lives just were so miles apart from what was happening in number 10. That's a really damaging thing, I think, about this whole story. And that was the really, before we get on to Boris Johnson's explanation of all this, that was the really strong sense you got yesterday. There was a session in Parliament where Labour asked an urgent question about this. Of course, Boris Johnson didn't arrive to answer it. He sent the paymaster general Michael Ellis, quite a junior minister. But you really felt from lots of MPs that the sort of, it was quite visceral. It was the emotion of it and the real anger and it was based on both their own personal experiences and also their constituents' experiences of, you know, what they were having to do. And still so raw. I mean, Jim Shannon, the DPMP, you know, he was in tears. He was talking about how his mother-in-law died alone because they couldn't be with her. You know, lots of MPs telling similar stories, really traumatic stories. And you can feel that the pain has stayed with people. You know, we're talking about something that dates back a year, 18 months, but people really, really have not forgotten the pain of being separated from their loved ones when they were going through difficult things. And Gabby, when I was talking to conservative MPs yesterday from different wings of the party, they were saying they were very, very keen to hear what Boris Johnson, they were sort of withholding judgment until they saw what Boris Johnson had to say today. They felt that he couldn't continue to hide behind the Sue Grey inquiry, senior civil servant who's looking at a whole load of these parties, of course. He couldn't continue to say, you know, gosh, I can't answer any of these questions. It's being investigated. Let's wait. They were very keen to hear him take some personal responsibility. He sort of did that, didn't he? If anything, I have to say, I ended PMQ thinking he might have made it worse. I mean, his defence is essentially, I'm very, very sorry, but that he went to the party but didn't realise it was a party. With hindsight, I should have sent everyone back inside. I should have found some other way to thank them. And I should have recognised that even if it could be said technically to fall within the guidance, there would be millions and millions of people who simply would not see it that way. That he turned up for 25 minutes in a garden packed with dozens of people boozing in the sunshine and went back to his office. Apparently, none the wiser, that this wasn't, in fact, a business meeting. And Keir Starmer described that excuse as so ridiculous as to be offensive. And I think he's probably right there. But there's a second deeper question. It's not just, you know, is that convincing to the listening public? Do they think, oh, yes, of course, that sounds perfectly reasonable explanation. But it's also, can he prove he didn't mislead parliament back in December when in response to reports of an earlier party, he insisted that no rules were broken in number 10 during lockdown. The only way that can be true is if the party really was, you know, a gathering essential to the purposes of work. But his excuse isn't quite that. It's that he didn't realise it was an inessential gathering, even though many people will think it should have been bleeding obvious that that's exactly what it was. So I think the question of misleading parliament remains live, even if you buy the excuse, and it's a pretty far-fetched excuse, they didn't notice a party actually happening around him. Much as I love recording this podcast with you, Heather, I'm not under the impression it's a party. It's rare that I have been to a party and mistaken it for, in fact, a good day in the office. Most people can tell the difference. And if you can't tell the difference, I does say something quite interesting about your working environment, I would say. Yeah, I'm sad to say I do not have a glass of wine in my hand, a rose or otherwise, Gabby. I needed a drink after my... Maybe that would have been... It's just a different question. Might improve things, no end. But, and the question for Conservative MPs now is, are they willing to go out and defend this, isn't it? So when they get the call from their local paper or local broadcast or whatever, are they willing to go out there and say, well, you know, the Prime Minister's apologised, and it's a perfectly reasonable mistake to make. That's his workplace. It's also his home. You know, yes, he did pop out for 25 minutes that just after six o'clock, and then, you know, yes, there were people standing around with glasses of wine, but he perfectly reasonable, reasonably thought it was a work event. I mean, it's quite a sticky ricket if you're a Tory MP, isn't it? I think it's a very difficult story to repeat with a straight face for a lot of MPs, and that's why we've seen, you know, dearth of them on the airwaves over the last few days. They don't want us, well, I think, to be held to a line that might change, because there have been, let's just say, various accounts of various parties in number 10. And as an MP, you don't want to be held out to dry for defending something that later turns out to be indefensible, or where the excuse later turns out to change. I mean, this was just on a personal level. This PMQs was pretty excruciating. He looked embarrassed. He looked pale. He looked pretty done in. And when it gets to sort of things like, I mean, the Labour MP, Toby Perkins, raised the fact that the Prime Minister supposedly had to lie down in the back of his official car to avoid being photographed as he left down in the street. I mean, that's just embarrassing for someone in number 10. It's not prime ministerial. This is end of day stuff. And I think you could see people really feeling that in the chamber. Yeah, it's a message to me watching it, just saying, you know, it's a sort of Johnson ally, just saying he looks broken. You know, he really looks broken. And Gabby, do you think, does this feel to you like the beginning of an end? I mean, one of the points is, I suppose, that it's not come out of the blue. This has come off the back of quite a long period now of weeks or months, which sort of kicked off really with the Owen Paterson affair, I suppose, where MPs were sort of marched through the division lobbies to support this bid to overturn the punishment against Owen Paterson, the disgraced former MP. Then the next day, you know, Johnson dropped him like a stone when he realised that that wouldn't really wash. There's a long period now where Conservative MPs feel that they've been sort of dragged into the mire, isn't there? And it just got worse and worse progressively over the week. So I wonder whether you think this is the sort of the tipping point. The other problem, you're right, is that it's a constant barrage of stuff and it won't go away. You know, the minute the fuss from one party dies down, there's another party sort of pops up out of the undergrowth. But also the sense, I think, that is getting in the way of the core job of government. If there's any good news to announce, like Michael Gove's announcements earlier this week about finding resolutions to the cladding problem, that's something that they would really have wanted to get across to voters in those seats where it's a big issue, you know, but it's all drowned out in partygate. This is making it impossible for the whole of government to do its job. Those who have been prepared to go along with it up to now have done so thinking that on balance, you know, he's still more of an asset than he is a liability. And he did win some credit with a lot of Tory MPs for holding out against a lockdown over Christmas with the Omicron environment. Whatever, you know, listeners may have their own views on whether that decision was right or wrong, but a lot of Tory MPs were very pleased by it. And you could feel him clawing back, you know, some credibility with them. And you saw the poll lead, Labour's poll lead narrowing again a bit. But then just as you think, oh, possibly there's a way out of it for him, he's dragged back into it. It's that sense, I think, that they're never going to be free of answering these kind of embarrassing questions. And these kind of unforced errors that, since you get from many MPs, this wasn't just wrong. It was dumb. You know, why did no one realise, it should be blooming obvious, that this was a stupid thing to do. Why does no one realise? And do you want to be harnessed to an operation that makes those kinds of mistakes forevermore? And also, if you're a voter, it sort of plays into a lot of things that we already knew about Boris Johnson. You might have quite liked him because he's a bit of a rule breaker. And, you know, he's somebody who doesn't do what the establishment do. You know, he was willing to kind of stand up against this, all these sort of people in Westminster over Brexit and so on. But it means you've already got this idea in your head that he's someone who maybe, you know, doesn't play by the rules. He's not sort of standard politician, bit of a maverick. And then this thing happens that plays into that sort of sense you already have of the kind of politician that he is. And that makes it quite likely to stick, doesn't it? Yes, I think so. And also, people like rule breakers when they are breaking the same kind of rules that you could imagine yourself breaking. You don't like rule breakers when what they're doing is deciding that the rules that apply to other people don't apply to them. And that's the difference. It's the contrast between the sacrifices that other people were making and the sacrifices that clearly government couldn't be bothered making. I mean, that's what it comes down to. And Gabby, if we should talk through, should we, what would happen if conservative MPs did, collectively, or sort of, you know, one by one, as it were, come to the decision that they can no longer support Boris Johnson as leader, that they can put letters in, can't they, to the chair of the 1922 committee, Graham Brady, which, if the threshold of 54 is reached, triggers a vote of no confidence. And if Boris Johnson were to lose that vote of no confidence, that's it, isn't it? Yeah, then we have a leadership contest. So it's always, someone always said it's easy to get the first two letters, it's getting the 52nd that's hardest. It's knowing that you'll be the MP that tips it over the edge. And it tends to come with previous leaders, when it comes, it comes in a flurry, it comes all at once. It's that you suddenly reach a point where the critical mass of the party is like, nah, we can't go on with this. And at that point, the floodgates open. And I think that rarely happens, and that rarely happens, and that rarely happens, and that rarely happens.