 This is The Guardian. After weeks of speculation, Boris Johnson finally committed to a Cabinet reshuffle. And what a reshuffle it was. I'm Jessica Elgott, Chief Political Correspondent at The Guardian, and this is Politics Weekly. As I record, all of us in the lobby team are trying to desperately catch the latest twist in this reshuffle saga, so you might hear furious typing and colleagues on the phone in the background of this podcast. It has been one of the most chaotic days in Westminster, well, since the last one. The Prime Minister culled several names from his front bench, opting instead to promote some of his most ambitious and media-friendly ministers. After weeks of dangling over the heads of his Cabinet, we finally know who is in and who is out. So will this new Cabinet work in his favour? The Cabinet reshuffle came a day after another big Government announcement. And it's just not sensible to rule out completely this kind of option now. When we must face the fact that it might still make the difference between keeping businesses open at full capacity or not. The Covid winter plan, or rather two Covid winter plans. So will Johnson succeed in the rollout of Plan A, or will he be forced to move to Plan B? And what happens if they both fail? That's all in this week's Politics Weekly. But first, on a day that saw some ministers send out their farewell tweets before heading to the backbenches, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti caught up with the Guardian's Deputy Political Editor, Rowena Mason, to try and figure out what just happened. So Rowena, a slightly busier day for the two of us than we necessarily expected. Let's just quickly go through who's out there. So, I'm going to start with the first question. I'm going to start with the first question. I'm going to start with the second question. defenders left really after the fiasco over exam results and schools being shut during the coronavirus pandemic. He's also incredibly gaffe prone. One thing I would say about him is that he is a sort of Machiavellian figure which can be hard for the public to see really given that he's perhaps a figure of fun given his many gaffes but he has the potential to be quite discontented and put out by this not just a sacking from the role of education secretary but removal from the cabinet entirely and so Boris Johnson might have made an enemy on the back benches there and Gavin Williamson is not really an enemy you might want because he knows a lot of secrets from his time as Chief Whip and he has a lot of contacts in the media as well so he could make life slightly difficult for the Prime Minister if he should so choose. The other two losses from the cabinet today have obviously been the two Roberts, Jenric and Buckland from the MHCLG and Justice briefs. What do we know about the reasonings behind their sackings? Now those are slightly more surprising. I think with Robert Buckland there is a sense that he was just a little bit dispensable. He's a fairly sort of affable chap. He's not going to cause the Prime Minister any trouble from the back benches and he's been a long time supporter of Johnson but he was also a remainer and he's not really made any secret of that or tried to pretend that he now believes in Brexit particularly. Turning to Robert Jenric, he's not particularly done anything stunning and in his role as in the Ministry of Housing and he has been responsible for a few sort of gaffes and messes including the planning reforms which has really annoyed the Tory Shires the idea that the government was going to allow more building in green areas. That's now been watered down if not dropped entirely. Now outside the cabinet, Amanda Milling, another interesting departure. She's gone as party chair. I actually bumped into her last week and she did not seem to be expecting that kind of move. The former Culture Secretary, Oliver Dowden, has now moved into the role to replace her. I have to say Milling didn't have a terribly high opinion among some Tory MPs who viewed her as pretty ineffective. One texted me today saying they were opening the champagne when it was announced she was going. What did you make of her departure? I would say most people would say about Amanda Milling, Amanda Who. I mean she was completely anonymous. She had absolutely no profile even among Conservative party members. The grassroots really didn't know anything about her and she failed to make much of the job. It's interesting what you say there that she wasn't personally expecting it because that might be something to do with the fact that she's considered an ally of Boris Johnson. She worked in his leadership campaign, not just the most recent one, but she's been an ally of his back even as far back as 2016. It's a reshuffle that shows that Johnson has not been afraid to turn over some of his closest allies so it's not just Williamson but Milling too, which is surprising given his propensity to shy away from annoying people that he owes favours to. Right, so we've rounded up the ones who have gone. Of course, there have been a couple of moves as well. Dominic Raab has sort of been debated and is no longer Foreign Secretary. He's now in charge of the Ministry of Justice instead, though it seems there's a sweetener there to avoid his blushes and to make it more palatable. Raab's obviously been made Deputy Prime Minister in addition to his new title but the last person to officially hold that role was actually Nick Clegg. Do you get the sense that that was the only way that Raab would actually go willingly? Yes, I expect so. We've talked about Raab and the fact that he spent a long time in there with Boris Johnson. That's a sign that a minister is a little bit unhappy perhaps, airing his grievances. There's definitely known that he was not pleased about being blamed for the mess of the evacuation from Afghanistan over the summer but it seems the Prime Minister was determined to move him and had held back this idea in reserve of him becoming Deputy Prime Minister. It doesn't seem as though that comes with any particular extra responsibilities apart from of course, deputizing for Boris Johnson in his absence and that's actually what Raab's been doing all along with his title of the First Secretary of State. He did it once before when the Prime Minister was ill with coronavirus and the pandemic last year. It's not like there's any particular, it's that much of a sweetener for Dominic Raab although to say your Deputy Prime Minister is a slight upgrade from saying a First Secretary of State. And of course reshuffles are a brutal game. One person's loss is another person's gain, especially if you're Liz Truss who's going to be replacing Raab and becoming the first Conservative female Foreign Secretary. That will probably go down very well with the party faithful, won't it? She's seen as being sort of one of the top performers in the cabinet at least in terms of popularity. Yes that's true. She's one of the ones who's coming top all the time in surveys about Conservative Party members. They really like her sort of pure free market views. One perhaps interesting angle to it though is she is considered now quite a contender for to be a future Prime Minister and you do slightly wonder whether she's got that role as a sort of perhaps a way to get her out of the country, a bit more of something Prime Ministers often do if there's somebody in their cabinet that they find a bit threatening on the domestic front. They put them in the Foreign Secretary role. It means they'll be out of the country a lot and not on the television screens all the time. And there were a couple of other interesting moves. You've got Nadeem Zahawi who's taken over from Gavin Williamson. Michael Gove has replaced Robert Jenrick and Nadeem Dorries has taken over from Alva Dowden in the Culture Brief. So what do we know about those moves and is the sort of overall strategy of the reshuffle likely to go down quite well? Well Nadeem Zahawi is being viewed as an effective Minister in his role as Vaccines Minister. So this is a reward for him. He's seen as somebody who works with purpose in a department, quite an effective organiser. He's a former businessman. So the hope will be that he will try and get the Education Department in order after Gavin Williamson's tenure. And you've got Michael Gove as the new Housing Secretary. That's interesting because it shows that Boris Hunter still doesn't really trust him enough to elevate him to a great Office of State. I would describe probably as a sideways move. I know people around him might try and pitch his promotion from the Cabinet Office, but it's not particularly. I mean, it gives him more, it gives him a sort of departmental responsibility for housing. And he is seen as this kind of departmental problem solver where he kind of goes in and he sorts out an area in Whitehall and there's lots of policy meat to get his teeth into. But he's certainly not got a huge job there. Nadeem Dorries, yes, that's a slightly peculiar one that she's got this great big elevation to the Cabinet. I'm not sure a few years ago that you could have guessed that she would be getting an enormous job. Very famous back in the David Cameron and George Osborne era, having described them as two posh boys who don't know the price of milk and has been a really long term supporter of Boris Johnson. So that's perhaps an area where her loyalty has been rewarded over time. Yeah, so I wonder how long she'll be in there before we get the headlines. I'm a Cabinet Minister, get me out of here. Yes, of course, she's famous for I'm a celebrity, get me out of here. And also for questioning the BBC as left-wing bias and thinking media is on the broadcast for a two left-wing. She's definitely someone who you would think might be tempted to play into the culture wars rather than to dampen them down. So perhaps that's what the Prime Minister wants in that role of somebody who's going to be fairly robust with the BBC. And of course, we can't finish without talking about those who have just stayed in their place off forgotten. But we've still got Rishi Sunak as Chancellor, British Tellers Home Secretary, Grant Shapps in Transport and Sajid Javid, only very recently into that job, obviously, as Health Secretary, host of others also safe. Was it a case really of let's rock the boat, but actually not too much? Yes, I think that's a very good way of describing Albury. It would have been absolutely colossal for the PM to move Rishi Sunak as Chancellor. He's very popular with the Conservative Party and not unpopular with the public because of his oversight of the furlough scheme that's kept a lot of people in work. He seems to be safe for now. But who knows what will happen in future? And Rishi Patel as Home Secretary, she has long been mooted to somebody that might have to be moved, particularly since she was found to have broken ministerial code of allegations of bullying. But it was thought that Boris Johnson might take the plunge and try and move it to another role. She was mooted as a possible party chairman, but obviously decided to keep her in place. And she's now one of two women holding great offices of state, meaning that's now half of great offices of state held by female cabinet ministers. And Granche in transport, he'll be extremely happy with that. He's always liked the transport portfolio. And he's another early backer of Boris Johnson. So that's not particularly surprising. And Sadhgir Javed, again, as you say, Albury, he was only pushed into that job relatively recently. So it was very unlikely that he'd been moved. So overall, it's a reshuffle that cleared out some ministers who must have been expecting to lose their jobs. And a lot of other ones will be breathing a sigh of relief that their roles have been safe for now. And do you think the reshuffle is likely to reinvigorate a conservative party that's been slightly bruised by tax increases and reassert Boris Johnson's leadership? Because that has come slightly into question in recent weeks. Well, perhaps the changes at the top of the chairmanship of the Conservative Party might be designed to try and sort that out, because there has been quite a bit of muttering of unhappiness among the grassroots. And Boris Johnson's fallen in popularity among them. He'll be wanting to try and reassert his true blue conservative credentials after they are questioned by his former employees at the Telegraph, which must have hurt him given how much we know he listens to that newspaper in particular. So perhaps this is a reshuffle designed to stress that he is still a true conservative. And I imagine that the new Tory chairman will be charged with making sure the members know that. Broena, thanks so much for sticking around at the end of a mad day to talk to me. No problem. Thank you. After the break, Raphael Baer brings us up to speed on the government's winter COVID plan. We'll be right back. Welcome back to Politics Weekly. I'm Jessica Elgott. Now, as we head into the winter, experts are warning that the NHS could soon become overwhelmed with COVID cases. So yesterday, the Prime Minister announced the government's COVID winter plan, or rather plans. Guardian columnist Raphael Baer has been analysing the details. Let's start with COVID, which it doesn't feel like we've talked a lot about in recent weeks. Heading into the winter, where are we now versus where we would like to be? Well, the short answer to that is no one's entirely sure because where we are now is transformed by the existence of quite a lot of vaccinated people. You know, what the Prime Minister calls this wall of immunity. So although you've got the hospitalizations at a rate high enough that if people weren't vaccinated, you'd be going back into lockdown. I mean, that's sort of where the graph looks like compared to this time last year. But a lot of people are saying that the hospitalizations are not as high enough as they are now. So that's what the data looks like compared to this time last year. But of course, what we've also got is a pretty steady and flat infections rate, which suggests that the pandemic, although it's not going away, nor is it running out of control. And so that's why we have this slightly awkward situation where you've come out of a summer where people have broadly been given the impression that essentially it's all over by the shouting and you can actually carry on shouting as much as you like. People aren't from the autumn and winter, people are going back indoors, people are going back to work. And we're about to really stress test that wall of immunity. And that's why I think in the press conference yesterday, chart I was discerning, a fair amount of anxiety are on the face of Chris Wittei. All of medicine. There is almost no area of medicine which is risk free. So what you're always trying to do is balance risk against benefit. And that's true in this decision as all other ones. suppose what is the kind of tricky thing and that a lot of people can't get their heads around it was, you know, when we're going to the lockdown, this time, well, a few months later last year, we kind of had the hope and promise of a vaccine, we had an end date and now we've got a vaccine and most people have been vaccinated, the vast majority of the country, or at least the adult population has been vaccinated. And yet, there still seems to be a risk, people still seem to be getting infected even if they've been vaccinated. Really that means that they, you know, get a much, much milder version. And then the question starts to appear, doesn't it, that, okay, well, if we're getting lots of infections in vaccinated people, but what they're getting is a kind of mild illness, do we just allow that to happen? Do we just allow those infection rates to keep going up? And what's the point where we just have to say, look, that is, it's just going to become one of those sort of mild winter illnesses and you get some protection from the vaccine. It's just a tricky balance, isn't it? Well, there are lots of interlocking issues here. So the first thing to say, I think, about that is a lot of people are vaccinated and you know, well over two thirds now, or over two thirds are, of adults are double jabbed and that's great. And they have, as you say, a decent amount of protection way more obviously than if they weren't vaccinated. But that still leaves quite a lot of people who aren't vaccinated and a small proportion of a very, very large number of people, which is the adult population of the UK, is still an awful lot of people who can get very, very ill. You know, on top of that, there's this question of whether, of how long the immunity you get from the vaccination lasts. Some questions have been raised about that. There's so much uncertainty as ever with this thing. We don't really know. And the test is not necessarily, you know, can we live with a nasty illness out there, sort of endemic but not pandemic in the society? Probably yes, people can adapt. Probably where it becomes really salient actually is can the NHS function normally and in a way that people don't feel the services breaking down doesn't become politically difficult for the government when you've got this nasty illness circulating at quite a high level, even if it's stable. And then also you get a flu, seasonal flu on top of that. So that I think is what will give the government reason to change gear in terms of actual social restrictions on the disease. And all of this brings us to the winter plan that was announced by Boris Johnson. And plan A is essentially just keep doing what we're doing, but with these added vaccines with the booster program for over 50s, and with the vaccination of 12 to 15 year olds. I mean, there are sort of other things, part of it, you know, carry on testing, etc. But it's essentially just double down on what we're doing already. And how long can that hold, do you think? Well, first of all, politically, once you say you've got a plan B, then obviously journalists look at plan B and start treating it as if it's plan A. Because that's the more interesting thing. What if it doesn't work? What if plan A falls apart? Ultimately, the test will be whether the infection rate starts to go up and therefore and the hospitalization rate tracks that as inevitably it does, although how steeply depends on the immunity of the population and the vaccination. The thing that strikes me about plan B, which is, you know, the return of mask wearing the return of some working from home, and then also vaccine passports, which you know, odds are they may not ever be able to have the strengthening the Tory party to introduce those is that lots of people are doing those things already. A lot of people are still doing hybrid working from home. A lot of people are still wearing masks when they go on public transport and in retail. So it begs the question is plan B, if things are really bad, is plan B going to be enough because it's sort of what a lot of people are doing already. It's what a lot of people are doing in places where lots of people are doing it, if you see what I mean, and this becomes a question of sort of social norms versus actual rules and regulations. And what you see, I think is a sort of a degrading of, of observation of those rules when they're not rules anymore. And that's where you have this problem that ultimately, you know, one of the sort of demographic segments where adherence, so voluntary adherence to social distancing, mask wearing and the rest of it is particularly weak is that demographic group, which is the Conservative Party. And you see, you know, in the Chamber of the House of Commons around the cabinet table in a sort of close quarters indoor poorly ventilated environment full of lots of people of a particular age who should be extra wary of COVID not wearing masks. And once that culture has taken hold in the Conservative Party, it becomes very difficult to get back to just a sort of even tempered rationalistic evaluation of what the science says at any given moment or what the best public health policy would be. That's going to be more of a problem, I think, for the Prime Minister, it moving, as I say, changing gears from plan A to plan B or having a plan C than anything else, I would have thought that that culture in the Conservative Party. And I suppose that brings us nicely on to talking about vaccine passports, the idea that will never die, even when cabinet ministers say it's dead, it's never dead. This idea that documents would be necessary for fully vaccinated people to get into nightclubs, if you're not fully vaccinated, I, you know, tests don't cut it, it's all about vaccinations. And Boris Johnson seems to really flip flop about whether he's in favour of these things so much. I think there's still a bit up in the air whether there actually needs to be any kind of parliamentary vote on it. But it's something that the Tory backbenchers feel extremely strongly about, don't they? My sense, and this is something that I think could really come back to haunt him, is that over the summer, he allowed himself and people in number 10 allowed themselves to think that they got COVID done the way they think they got Brexit done and Brexit wasn't done, by the way, and neither is the pandemic. And that slightly toad of toad haul, impatient, what's the next thing, what's my new fad aspect of the Prime Minister's character, means that he's vulnerable to reaching November, things getting quite difficult with the pandemic and people turning around and saying, you really squandered the summer, didn't you? I mean, it was things were looking good over the summer. All you needed to do was just go a bit slower, keep people working from home, a bit more, maybe a bit more masks, maybe introduce the vaccine passport, and we wouldn't be back in lockdown if that's where we end up. That I think is the danger. It's that we've got a character in number 10, Boris Johnson, who's just bored with this and wants to move on and the virus isn't ready to move on. Is there, do you think, I mean, there must be a plan C? Do they know what they're going to do if plan B doesn't work? If the question is, can we rely on Boris Johnson's cabinet who have done all the necessary preparation and with a high degree of competence, war-game the various scenarios so that the UK is well insulated against the hazards of a pandemic resurgence? I'd say the precedent suggests no. What should plan C, I mean, can you avoid, you know, if plan B doesn't work, are there ways to avoid a full lockdown? Clearly there is going to, it's going to take, you know, it's going to have to be dragged by wild horses to close schools again, to close businesses again. It feels like that is something that this prime minister just is not willing to do unless we get some terrible new variant that starts causing hundreds and hundreds of deaths a day. It's the NHS. If the noises sort of filter up through the Department of Health and reach Sajid Javad's desk, you know, all the lights on his dashboard are flashing red and people are saying, you are going to have a political crisis out of all proportion to anything we've had so far because of what's happening on wards. And then he then goes to the prime minister and says, we can't have any more people going into hospital. We need people to stay at home again. Then that's what will happen. But that will be the conduit, I think. Boris Johnson doesn't want to fight an election in the scenario where the NHS is on its knees and people are saying, same old Tories, look, they destroyed the health service and it's Boris Johnson's fault. So he's shovelling money into it and because it's politically enormously sensitive. And that will be exactly the same dynamic that decides whether or not we end up having to stay at home a bit longer over Christmas again. How does Labour play all this, Raph? It's a difficult line to tread, isn't it? Because Keir Starmer doesn't really want to be Captain Doom, you know, insisting the UK returns into another lockdown. That's not a recipe for popularity. Although, you know, we do, we often see the public in polling being more cautious than the politicians. But it is a tricky balance, isn't it? It's always a tricky balance for him to start calling for more restrictions. It's been an absolute nightmare for Labour, just from the very beginning. I mean, at the start of the pandemic, it's a national emergency. People wanted to pull together and to be attacking the government. It sort of came across as if you're sort of willing the government to fail in its battle against COVID. And that's sort of taking the side of the virus. So that wasn't something Keir Starmer could do. That moment has passed. It passed with the Barnard Castle and Cummings, Unraveling. And I think people have got a sense that you're allowed to have politics around the pandemic. But what an opposition position would actually be has not become at all clear. Look, I think part of the problem that Keir Starmer has developed over the course of the pandemic is his brand is now a little bit the guy who stands on the sidelines, tutting and saying, oh, well, you wouldn't want to do it like that. Or he's like the supply teacher who sort of leans over the prime minister's homework saying, oh, yes, well, you should have tried harder. You could have done this better. You know, who Keir Starmer is, which is something he really needs to establish in the eyes of the voters, is not going to be is a problem for him at the moment. And it's not one that has a solution in banging on about the pandemic and criticising the government for being too slow on these restrictions. And that is just a political problem for Labour. And finally, there was we had quite an amusing moment at the press conference and following it when Professor Chris Whitty and the Sep atte grants were asked to respond to questions and to respond to this viral tweet from Nicki Minaj about her poor cousin's friend who had some serious problems, apparently with his anatomy after getting the vaccine. And he probably wasn't expecting it to be scrutinised by the UK's chief medical officer. How much of a problem is that kind of viral tweets from celebrities or is it, to be honest, just quite funny? Oh, no, I think it's a huge problem. And you saw from Chris Whitty's response that, you know, he finds it distressing. I mean, I couldn't tell whether he'd actually heard of Nicki Minaj actually did a good job of sort of responding to the general problem of misinformation. Thank you, Prime Minister. So there are a number of myths that fly around with varying some of which are just clearly ridiculous and some of which are clearly designed just to scare. That's happened to one of them. That is untrue. My own strong suggestion, if I may, to media present and not present, is repeating them in public actually just gives them credence, which they don't need. And as we've gone through the summer where there is enough immunity that people can sort of behave more or less as they were before without the sky falling in, I think we are in a particularly dangerous moment now with this, where you could easily look around and think what was the fuss? What was this all about to begin with? Look, you know, there's no, it's all been a bit of a scam or it's all been a bit overblown. And I know that the sort of health professionals and people in government are very worried about that, as it were, the liberation that science has afforded us could end up being weaponised against the science. Never a dull week in Westminster. Raphael Bear, thanks ever so much for joining me. It's a pleasure, as ever. And that's all from us this week. Make sure to listen to Friday's episode of Politics Weekly Extra to hear Jonathan Friedland's conversation with none other than the former Secretary of State and presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. But for now, I want to thank our guests Aubrey Alagretti, Rowena Mason and Raphael Bear. The producers were Hattie Moyer and Danielle Stephens. I'm Jessica Elgott. Do look after yourselves and thanks for listening. This is The Guardian.