 This is The Guardian. Welcome to Politics Weekly Extra. I'm Jonathan Friedland and this week I hosted a special Guardian Live event where I spoke to the former Secretary of State and former Democratic Presidential nominee Hillary Rodham Clinton. America stopped last weekend to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the 9-11 attacks and Hillary Clinton and I talked about her memories of that day, where she was and what she felt given that she was the Senator for New York at the time. We talked about how American politics has changed since those attacks and whether or not the action the United States took after 9-11, particularly in Afghanistan, had made the world a safer place whether it had all been in vain. We talked about feminism, we talked about the white lotus on TV and we talked about whether she would ever consider running for the White House again. This was our conversation. Hillary Rodham Clinton, it is an absolute pleasure to have you with us for this Guardian Live event. Thanks so much for joining us from your home in Chappaqua, New York. I've been having lots of conversations over the last few days and weeks with people about 9-11 and the first question to all of them is what I'm going to put to you first tonight, which is just where were you on 9-11 and what do you remember of that day? I was on my way to the Senate for my day of work when the first plane hit and we thought, like so many did, that it was just a terrible tragic accident and I drove to the Senate building and on my way the second plane hit. So by then we knew of course it was not an accident, it was an act of terrorism. Our staff as was the entire Senate and the Congress being evacuated to safety because there was a very legitimate fear that the next target would be the U.S. Capitol. Because I was a Senator, my colleague and I, Chuck Schumer, flew to New York the next day and I will never forget first we were the only plane in the sky besides fighter jets that were providing a cap, a cover over the East Coast. Then we got into a helicopter at LaGuardia Airport and flew over Ground Zero and it was truly as much of a depiction of hell, Dante's Inferno, whatever one wants to envision, much more overwhelming than the TV screen which of course had to limit what it saw. And I spent the entire day then in New York before going back to Washington late that night to start working on the recovery program that was needed. Did you imagine then that the consequences of what you had just seen from the air as you went over in that helicopter, that the political consequences of that would be enduring for 20 years? And I'm thinking quite specifically because it was a matter of days later, I think it was on September the 18th 2001, where you and the entire Senate voted on the authorization of military force which gave the President George W Bush then a mandate really to do whatever he decided he needed to do. Did you think then that it was possible that United States troops forces would be in Afghanistan for 20 years? Jonathan, I don't think any of us really could have foreseen at that time what the next 20 years would bring. There was a very strong consensus not only in the Congress but also in the country to try to bring to justice those who had attacked the United States. And they were located in so far as our intelligence and every other piece of public information told us in Afghanistan. And remember at that point that then President Bush did say in addressing the Taliban, if you will break relations with Al Qaeda, you will not give them refuge at sanctuary in your country. Just let us have them and that will be the end of it. And the Taliban would not do that. And it then became a matter of trying to track down Bin Laden and his leaders and eventually Bin Laden himself hiding in Pakistan 10 years later. I mean I suppose what's behind my question is the sense that given everything that has happened since, you know the idea that for 20 years nearly 3,000 American lives, the President now, Joe Biden estimates that a trillion dollars has been spent in the intervening 20 years. Do you think now, and of course we've got the hindsight now, but do you think given that the Taliban were in then and they're back in now, that these last 20 years of life and treasure has been a waste? I would not say that. I think we have to look at what also has been accomplished in the last 20 years. The United States has not been attacked from Afghanistan again. And in those initial months and years following 9-11, that was a very real possibility that those of us who were in positions of responsibility had to face as to whether or not there could be enough capacity left in Al Qaeda or like-minded terrorist groups to launch attacks, not only at the United States, but obviously in Europe with other of our friends and allies. And there were several decisions made leading up to President Biden's decision to finally leave, but the most telling and consequential was President Trump's decision to tell the Taliban that the United States would be gone by May 1st and to sign an agreement with the Taliban without including the Afghan government at all. We hadn't even gotten that first demand from President Bush. Break ties with Al Qaeda, which they have never done. So there should be no surprise that the Taliban was well positioned once the actual withdrawal of American troops began to take over the country again. I mean, presidents are able to reverse the decisions of their predecessors. If you had been sitting around that table advising President Biden the way you were advising President Biden, President Obama, would you have said, look, we haven't got what we came for and we should not withdraw. And actually we do need that presence in Afghanistan, as you mentioned, to do the raid for Bin Laden required it. There may be future operations. Would you have advised President Biden not to withdraw or certainly not withdraw now? I don't think he had that choice, Jonathan. I think that it was way too far gone and I respect the decision to leave. But the Taliban had made it very clear there would be a ceasefire with respect to the American presence in Afghanistan, not only the military, but also the civilian presence, which was considerable. But if there was any effort to go back on the deal that Trump had made, then that ceasefire would end. And that would have put President Biden in an impossible position because I believe that our casualties, both military and civilian, would have increased dramatically. The real challenge are all those Afghans who bought into democracy, bought into changing gender roles, who were in government, the media, education, health care, business, all the professions, and particularly the women. And I'm afraid that all will be lost. So we do need to continue to do what we can to support those Afghans who are left and try to continue to evacuate as many who need to leave because of the dangerous position they find themselves in. Thank you. We have had many questions that have come in. I've got tons of questions I still want to ask, but let's bring in some of our readers. And quite a lot of them are wondering whether for full closure there does need to be, some are suggesting, an apology by the United States for the 20-year long occupation of Afghanistan or a statement that accepts failure. What do you think about that, that the United States making a statement? I don't know whether the word defeat has been used yet, but do you think it would be helpful for the United States and its leaders to talk in the terms that several of our readers are writing in with? Well, no, I don't agree with that. I think what President Biden has said is that the most important mission was finished, that there was no, in his view, there was no reason to continue a presence in Afghanistan. I don't think there's anything to apologize for trying to, you know, provide the kinds of support for the Afghan people. And by so many measurements, for those 20 years, a very big percentage of the Afghan people were better off. I want to move in some ways to more domestic matters, but there is a bridge between the two. There was a cartoon in one of the American papers of two Afghan women in burkas, and one says to the other, pray for the women of Texas. And it's the reference there, as you know, to this very restrictive, in some ways the most restrictive change in abortion rights in the United States since Roe v. Wade nearly 50 years ago. I wondered, because of decisions like that and others, do you worry that the United States might have lost the right, you could say, to lecture other countries or even to lead other countries on women's rights? You know, we all have to be aware that we fall short of our own ideals and values, but that doesn't mean we don't keep trying. And it certainly doesn't mean that we give up being aspirational, hopeful, and even optimistic, to try to do everything we can to set a higher goal, even set a higher standard for what we expect. I've been saying for many years that one of the clearest indicators of threats to democracy, of the kind of growing threat of authoritarianism, is what leaders do to try to limit the aspirations, the rights and opportunities of women. So, no, I think that we have a president who is very strongly on the side of women's rights and opportunities. And we have still a large majority of Americans who have the same set of feelings, and we should not be intimidated, and we should not in any way give in to the populist, authoritarian leadership and followers that are vying for Donald Trump's support and approval, because, you know, that is going to undermine freedom and opportunity for everybody if they're not careful. I think people will be fascinated to hear you talking about managing to retain some of that kind of optimism, because I mentioned there that Roe v. Wade being eroded, the law in Texas, for anyone not aware of that, is suggesting that abortion in effect banned from six weeks into a pregnancy. And of course, there's, you know, that can amount to two weeks or less for a woman who, once she knows she's pregnant. That erosion coming 50 years after a breakthrough like Roe v. Wade, we've talked about Afghanistan, similar thing, you know, these are gains that in some ways somebody like you would have thought, you know, that you could tick that box 40 or 50 years ago, we've done that. And instead, here you are now, 50 years on having to go back and fight that. And I was thinking that the challenges are not just without, they're also within. And you're obviously tremendously associated, you'll see nothing to embody a particular kind of strain of feminism. And I wonder the extent to which it depresses or dispirits you that feminism itself, the feminist movement is now so divided. And I'm thinking of a book which is beginning to get a lot of attention by Raphael Zakaria called Against White Feminism, a woman of color saying that the problem is white feminism, a division within the feminist movement. How troubled are you by that? Oh, not very. I mean, look, I think it's great to have vigorous discussion and debate about the path forward, what it means to be a feminist. I have a very simple explanation, which is that, you know, women are entitled to equal rights and opportunities to men in every aspect of society. So yes, of course, there are much more complicated and difficult conversations around all of what that means and how it's implemented. But when you have Republican elected officials who defend the kind of draconian anti-abortion, anti-choice laws, like we see in Texas calling women host bodies, that's really a threat to all women. That's not that that crosses every color line and every other line. So yeah, you've got to be willing to stay in the arena. Yeah. And I'm going to press this point there about the division. I don't know if you've seen this show, The White Lotus, because you're mentioned in it. In the first episode, there is a it's to bring out the notion of a generational divide. There's a character played by Connie Britton, who idolizes Hillary Clinton and just thinks Hillary Clinton is what it's about. And her daughter and her daughter's friend kind of roll their eyes at that as if to suggest there's a generational divide in how these two generations see feminism. And particularly, and often that divide is over the issue of trans rights, which, you know, the young generation think are, you know, are pushing. And then on the other side, the notion of for feminism demanding single sex spaces for women. And, you know, this TV show sort of brought you into that. And as I say, I don't know if you saw it, but it seemed to me a moment. And I wonder what you think of that divide and whether it is difficult for feminism. And where you yourself stand, whether, for example, you can say, as I think those young characters in that show would want you to say, trans women are women, is that a sentence you can say? The expansion of LGBTQ rights has been phenomenal. It's probably the fastest moving civil rights movement in in in human history. But I was around when there were schools I couldn't go to because I was a woman, where there were jobs I couldn't apply to because I was a woman, where there was a very clear distinction between what was appropriate and not appropriate for a woman in the workforce. And, you know, so for me, and for someone like Connie Britton, sort of close to my generational experience, we remember all of that. You know, I was an adult woman when Roe v. Wade was decided. And like most women of, you know, my generation, we knew the terrible stories about back alley abortions. So for us, this is very real. It is part of our lived and learned experience. And I don't think there should be any kind of conflict between expanding rights and recognizing identity and the rest. But there needs to be a recognition that the fights we thought had been won back in the 60s and the 70s and the 80s and the 90s are still under attack from those who do not want to see those really fundamental changes that young women today kind of take for granted. And so within those rights that still have to be fought for and protected, would that include, for example, rights determined by sex rather than gender for female only spaces? Let's you know, a lot of this is situational. And what we want is to protect and nurture the rights and opportunities of all women and girls. And in some cases, that's as basic as keeping them safe when they are out in public. So, you know, I'm going to listen and learn as a lot of, you know, very, you know, really determined and strong women on the front lines literally across the globe try to tackle these issues. So, Patsy Hickman writes, now that President Biden has smashed the age barrier for the presidency, please would you smash the remaining shards for women? I think Patsy might be thinking of the glass ceiling that was shattered into a million pieces. Will you run? We know it's exhausting and you've had bad luck, but this is important and it is your time, says Patsy Hickman. And I would add to that that, of course, Joe Biden did run three times and got there in the end and you have only run twice. What do you think? Thank you, Patsy, for that vote of confidence. It really is very meaningful, but I have no intention or plan to run again. I'm going to do everything I possibly can to elect people who I think are right for the country. And it won't surprise you to hear that I think the Republican Party has literally lost its mind. So I'm going to be working very hard to elect Democrats from the White House, you know, all the way down the ballot. You once said something that really interested me. It's it interested me at the time and I looked at it again and it interested me again. You said, I'm not a natural politician in case you haven't noticed, like my husband or President Obama. And I wondered what you had in mind, what your image of a natural politician was and whether, and I know we came back to the gender thing, but whether in a way the natural politician template in your mind is quite a male template. I mean, are there women who you would say, yeah, that's a natural politician in a way that I, Hillary, I, Hillary, Robin Clinton, am not a natural politician? No, it really is more about the the image of a, quote, natural politician that most people have in their heads. And, you know, when when I was running, occasionally, people would approach me or somebody I was working for, and they would say, you know, I want her to change the way she speaks, or I want her to, you know, do this or that. And my staff got very used to it. And their, their reaction always was to ask, well, who do you have in mind? And they would say, well, she needs to talk like her husband, or she needs to talk like, you know, President Obama. And they would say, well, tell us a woman she needs to talk like, and literally, people would be dumbfounded. So I was making the point that look, I was trying to become president, which in our country is head of state, as well as head of government, therefore would have been, quote, commander in chief, which is the role, one of the roles the president plays. And, you know, I knew that I had to overcome so much of this embedded view about what a leader looks like, what a leader sounds like. And I was trying to kind of get people to question their internal views of what a leader looked like and sounded like. But what was the answer to your own question to those women when I know it was your staff who would say to people, so who's the woman? Do you see a woman around who fits that kind of Bill Clinton Barack Obama natural politician template? Or is the only way actually America's going to elect a woman president is when it finally gets rid of that template altogether? I was on the front lines of people's consciousness. And so if they didn't like my hairstyle, or they didn't like my voice, or whatever it is, it was all, you know, focused on me. Now we have many more women who are out there who are competing, who are in the public awareness, you know, men run for office, they're all sizes and shapes and frankly, hairstyles and everything else. But they all have the benefit of being, you know, the male in the arena. And so now we're going to have different women who are going to be taller and shorter and different hairstyles and wear pants, wear skirts, whatever. I think that will go a long way toward beginning to break down the stereotype, because Oh, okay, yeah, I like so and so she's my governor, she's my senator, she's my vice president. Oh, okay. And there's enough women in the, you know, arena, so to speak, that it can begin to undermine there's only one way to look at the highest office in our land. And that is through a male perspective. You know, the other thing we should always say about this before we get carried away with the idea that the country wasn't couldn't accept etc. You did win the popular vote, you did win 3 million more votes than than your opponent. And so you know, before we over analyze America's unwillingness to embrace a woman president, you know, electorally millions more voted for a woman president than voted for Donald Trump, it's just you it's just you have a slightly messed up system. You could have someone who wins by nearly 10 million votes and still lose the electoral college under our crazy dysfunctional system, which is a remnant of, you know, frankly, compromises with slave states. Should scrapping the electoral college be the number one priority for Democrats from now on? Well, I wasn't I came out in favor of scrapping it in 2000 before I had any reason to believe it would affect me, because of what it did to Al Gore, Al Gore won the popular vote. I won the popular vote. Neither of us ended up in the White House. How bizarre is that? And so I think it should go, it will be practically impossible because it's embedded in the Constitution. So we've got to do everything we can to prevent the Republicans from changing the laws that govern elections in the states to try to make it impossible for Democrats to win again. We've only got a few minutes left. But there's obviously I've got so much I want to ask you, but just one on this point, because you mentioned it, and you know, Al Gore and you, you said earlier in our conversation that, you know, not a day went by while Donald Trump was president, where you didn't ask yourself those questions. Just on a human level, almost as Hillary Clinton, the person rather than, you know, the politician, what does that do to you? Does it still? Nor aware you those, you know, are you sometimes thinking that rally we did, if only we hadn't done it in Cleveland, we should have done it in Madison, Wisconsin. Does that happen? Do you sort of go over it and over it and over it? Or can you let go of it and move on on a human level? Well, I wrote a book about it. Because when it happened, I didn't understand it. I didn't I didn't understand how we were so off in all of our analyses, and all of our polling and research. I didn't understand the full extent of voter suppression, both in person and online. So I didn't know all of that, when it happened. So I spent about six months writing a book called What Happened? And I think it stands up really well. But once I did that, it was cathartic for me. And what I turned my attention to was trying to literally sound the alarm so that it wouldn't happen again, we are still struggling with disinformation online. This is going to have to be our last question. We've got so just a few seconds left. But it does relate to this. Do you ever worry that the United States might be entering a kind of twilight period, a period of decline? And the reason I ask this is, there's the defeat in Afghanistan. There's what you've just been talking about, which is half the society does not seem to believe in science, refusing to get vaccinated. You have a situation where one of the two main parties, by what you've said to us tonight, does not really believe in democracy. Do you worry that this is adding up to a society in its twilight? And as I say, this is going to be our last question. So this might be also your closing thought to us, Hillary Clinton. No, I don't. I don't believe that. But I do believe we are in a struggle for the future of our country. The very ambitious, bold plans that President Biden has put forward, investing in research, in infrastructure, in supporting families is exactly what our country needs, to go forward with confidence and more equality and more justice into the future. And the other side wants to stop that. So yes, I think we're in a monumental, critically important political struggle right now. The other side wants to rule by minority. It has a very powerful weapon in the filibuster in the Senate to rule by minority. It wants to change election laws so that it doesn't lose elections, despite what the will of the people might be. So this is a central struggle. But I don't think it's in any way a twilight. I think it's a very out in the open and the bright light of struggle that we need to make sure people understand what's at stake and enlist as many people as we possibly can to be successful in fighting back this revanchist obstructionist agenda that the other side is promoting. Our special guest this evening, marking 20 years since 9-11 with us. A big, big thank you to you, Hillary Rodham Clinton. Thank you so much, Jonathan. Thanks to the Guardian. And that is all from me this week. For anyone who wants to catch up on the latest in UK politics, do make sure to listen back to Wednesday's episode of Politics Weekly and a little request. I always really enjoy reading your comments and suggestions when you send them in. But if you feel like telling other listeners how much you like this podcast, please do subscribe and review Politics Weekly wherever you get your podcasts. But for now, it's goodbye. The producer this week was Esther Opoko Gennny and I'm Jonathan Friedland. Please take care of yourselves and thanks as always for listening.