 The Guardian. Boris Johnson calls for politicians to be civil and kind to each other as the rails continue over vaccines and universal credit. I'm Heather Stewart, political editor of The Guardian, and this is Politics Weekly. Quite a lot of Tory MPs know that cutting this money to people who desperately need it in the middle of a pandemic is the wrong thing to do. They know that. On Monday night, six Tory MPs defied calls from the Prime Minister to abstain and voted with Labour in an opposition day debate on the planned removal of a £20 a week uplift in universal credit for six million people. Boris Johnson called the vote a stunt and then through his new press secretary asked for people in political debate to be nicer to each other. With naughty political decisions still to come on who will get the vaccines when, and when and how to repair the public finances, are we leaving the pandemic politics of constructive criticism and heading for nastier waters? In Scotland, the surprise resignation of the Scottish Labour leader Richard Leonard has injected some energy into a party struggling to restore its fortunes among the electorate. Plus looking ahead to Rishi Sunak's budget at the start of March, I speak to experts about how he can help Boris Johnson with his plan to level up the UK. That's all in this week's Politics Weekly. But first, as vaccine rollout plans take shape and universal credit becomes a fraught topic, I'm joined by my colleague Peter Walker to discuss the action this week. Peter, it's lovely to have you on. Let's maybe start with vaccination, shall we? Which is one of the big challenges the government has at the moment, that they're getting through those first groups, the over 80s and so on. But I noticed this week, poor old Matt Hancock self isolating, isn't he, again? George Osborne suggested some ministers could get the vaccine first as a matter of priority or next rather. Do we know if that's being considered and how are these kinds of decisions being made? Every time number 10 gets asked about this, they go very slightly frightened and kind of refer it all to this organisation called the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which is the JCVI, which is the one that came up with this kind of list of the first people should be care home residents, over 80s and things like that. And they're basically desperate to make sure that there's not any kind of idea that they're kind of spinning it for their mates. And there is an argument, there's a perfectly good kind of utilitarian argument that vaccinating about 20 or 30 top government ministers, mainly they don't have to self isolate would probably make sense in the national scheme of things, but they're never ever going to do it. Because then you'd have newspaper headlines of, you know, healthy cabinet ministers getting it before frail 95 year olds. They're not so much in a kind of bind, but they are very, very keen, you know, as with a lot of kind of COVID related things to say, Oh, it's all about the science, we're not actually going to make the choice. You know, because the decisions over who gets vaccinated first, it's an incredibly sensitive one. And I think they're trying to distance themselves from that as much as they can. And the politics of that is going to be quite difficult, isn't it? Because you have lots of lobbying for various different groups, you have the teachers unions saying, you know, our staff are very vulnerable, they're in the classes full of kids all the time, passing it on. And you've of course, got police saying, you know, what about us? And then you've got to think about, for example, supermarket workers who are still out there every day, aren't they, you know, keeping us all going? Yeah, it's this incredibly difficult thing. And it's, you know, the way that kind of medical regulators have to almost like balance up the cost of a medicine over how many, you know, life years it'll save. It's this thing that, on average, teachers and police officers are going to be healthier and younger than maybe someone over 60. But at the same time, they're exposed to the virus is very, very great. And Cresta Dick, the head of the Metropolitan Police are saying, you know, that she very much believes that police officers should be somewhere near the front of the queue for the next lot of people teaching unions, as you say, are saying that, I mean, I genuinely don't know which way the government's going to go whenever number 10 asked about this, they basically hide behind this thing saying, oh, it's just the JCVI. And they also point out that ultimately, ministers decide whether or not to follow the recommendations of the JCVI. But I think what they'd really like would be for this committee to, I don't know, come up with an order that everyone could more or less agree on. And then the minister say, well, we know we just do what they say. And we should acknowledge, Peter, that so far this vaccine rollout, as we have to call it seems to be going pretty well, doesn't it? It's pretty fast, isn't it? You know, compared to some of the other operations we've seen, test and trace and so on, it's so far it's looking good, isn't it? It's almost become a kind of cliche of talking about the vaccinations, that it's the one time in the Covid era when this government has kind of under-promised but actually done more than it said it would. And it was notable that when the first number 10 press conferences, you know, when the vaccines were about to be done, Boris Johnson is normally very, very bullish, you know, who's famously saying things will be normal by Christmas, things will be normal in 12 weeks, all these kind of deadlines he's had to go back from. He was quite careful and he was saying, look, we aim to get these top groups done by February middle of. But he was being very, very kind of cautious, saying there's a lot of caveats, it depends on this, depends on that. The vaccination numbers day by day have varied a little bit and it's been incredibly difficult to work out why and also to work out why some areas are vaccinated more quickly than others. Supply seems to be one issue. But overall, you know, even Labour is saying this is the area of the pandemic where they think the government's actually done pretty well. The Welsh government have come in for a bit of criticism, haven't they? Mark Drakeford has over the way that they're sort of trying to distribute the vaccines over days rather than using every single vial as soon as it gets to them. Is that, is there any fairness in that? Again, it's kind of tricky because the number 10 insistence is that every region and every area has been given a kind of proportionate number of vaccines that they need. But for the same token, some areas, not just Wales, are managing to vaccinate people at a slower rate, like the rate in London is notably slower than some areas, for example, in the north. And it's not quite clear why. I mean, you know, at the regular daily lobby briefing yesterday, there's a lot of questions to Boris Johnson's people as to why there was this kind of big regional difference and we didn't really get any answers. So, you know, Mark Drakeford is getting a bit of stick for it and there might be some political areas that have been made. But Wales is by no means the only area which is lacking and it's still not quite clear why. We had a bit of a return to oppositional politics as usual this week, didn't we? Very much so. With Labour's bid to persuade the government to maintain the £20 a week uplift in universal credit that Wishi Sunak introduced as an emergency measure at the sort of height of the pandemic last spring. It got a bit nasty, didn't it? It got really, really nasty because this is almost, I mean, part of it comes from when Labour lasted an opposition day motion about extending free school meals. And it became seen as this kind of quite clear cut moral issue. And when Conservative MPs voted against it, there was a lot of online criticism, some of it really nasty against Conservative MPs. But, you know, to be fair, that is what an opposition's job part of the year is, is to point out issues which they say is very, very clear cut and where they see the government's going wrong. You know, a lot of charities have pointed out that this £20 a week is incredibly vital and it's currently due to disappear in April. And no one really believes the pandemic is going to be, you know, normalised by then. So there's a very, very clear case to carry it on. And the government's in a bit of a bind because they've, you know, muted the idea of giving everyone on universal credit a one off payment or extending it for six months or extending it for a year. And again, they seem to be kind of caught up in this kind of current rather than kind of taking control. But this opposition day motion, which is just a kind of symbolic vote, the debate on it was really kind of quite odd because Labour were being reasonably measured. They were saying, look, we realise abuse is obviously wrong, but we think this is something the government should do. But the number 10 line, which was repeated by a lot of the Conservative MPs who got up and spoke was this is opportunism. This is kind of an incredibly opportunistic thing to do. And Labour trying to get the public to, you know, abuse Tory MPs. And the whole thing just felt quite artificial and slightly strange. And in the end, the debate was a bit of a damp squib really. But there's a risk, isn't there, that, you know, the way the public see this is, you know, rather how Labour see it, which is, you know, it's rather cruel, really, not to extend this payment at a time when the pandemic's clearly, you know, in full flow still. Louise Casey, who's reviewed a series of issues for the government, she talked today, didn't she, about the Conservatives returning to the label, the Nasty Party. That's a risk for them here, isn't it? It's a real risk. And free school meals and universal credit are the two areas where they've basically been on the back foot. With free school meals, they've been for months saying, no, we're not the change. Then Marcus Rashford sends a few tweets and they suddenly do change. And universal credit has this feel of this kind of thing. And some of the newer Northern Conservative MPs are not very pleased because these are kind of issues which, you know, I think a lot of the people who switched from Labour to the Conservatives in 2019, a lot of those voters would feel it's quite a kind of important issue, you know, is quite a kind of pivotal one. And there is this real danger that, you know, as the pandemic goes on, they'll be seen as, you know, kind of mean-spirited. And yet, as you say, the claim from Boris Johnson's end was that it was Labour who were the bullies, wasn't it? That was, he sent these MPs this extraordinary message and, you know, he said, we're not going to take part because, you know, our MPs have been subject to terrible sort of bullying and intimidation. And you know, it is very, very true that the kind of social media world for politicians and MPs is not particularly nice. But I don't think you can necessarily blame Labour for this when they're, you know, doing an Opposition Day motion, which is a very long established parliamentary thing, which is when the opposition party gets to raise what they see as an important issue and no one pretend that, you know, this issue is an kind of artificial one. You know, £1,000 a year, as Labour pointed out, is for many people, the difference between being able to like pay your gas and electricity bills over the course of a year and not being able to. Did it get any better for the Tories? Did it, Peter, when Boris Johnson's new press secretary, Allegra Stratton, tried to explain what he meant in that rather pugnacious message that he sent to his MPs? Well, this was genuinely one of the stranger lobby calls I've been on. I mean, to give listeners a picture, these days, obviously, we're not physically in a room, you know, firing questions at people. It's all in this massive kind of conference call where everybody WhatsApps in questions to a chair who's a journalist who then addresses them to the Prime Minister spokesman and the Prime Minister's press secretary. And this was a very strange one because Allegra Stratton was saying that Boris Johnson had a very strong belief that politics needed to be civil and kind. And the moment she said those things, I was just like, Flo, what's that message? She's saying, hang on, did actually hear that correctly, because Boris Johnson is known for many things in politics, but civility and kindness is not necessarily amongst them. He's used a lot of kind of loose and insulting language over the years. You know, so she was quizzed on this, whether it was civil and kind when Boris Johnson, for example, use words like you know, in the Brexit debate, like surrender and appeasement. And she said this slightly strange thing. So well, I'm talking about in the future. So I don't know if this is turning over a new leaf for Boris Johnson. Anyway, it was definitely very, very strange. Finally, Peter, there was quite an amazing opinion piece from the former Prime Minister Theresa May in the Daily Mail this morning, wasn't there as as as President Trump bows out? It was it was quite a read. Well, she's basically saying that the Boris Johnson government has lost its kind of moral compass, because it refused to commit to the same percentage of money going to global aid. And it promised to break international law over the Brexit deal. And it's fair to say the social media reaction has been very much on the lines was, is this the same to Theresa May who presided over government which had, you know, windrush the hostile environment and things like that? I mean, she wasn't exactly averse to sailing a bit close to the wind when she was PM. And the other slightly curious thing, which I found very odd was, May's article seemed to criticise Boris Johnson for kind of cozying up to Donald Trump. And there is certainly a fair criticism there. But this was a Prime Minister who, more or less the moment Donald Trump stepped off the inauguration stage was getting her officials to call his to try and get over to Washington. You know, she couldn't have been keener. Yeah, she was very keen. I was on that trip, it was extraordinary. And there was there was a kind of, there was a huge excitement in May's team that that, you know, she was the first leader to visit. Well, there was so I think there was this, and now seems hopelessly naive, but this idea that somehow she could sort of influence him, you know, she couldn't she stopped in Philadelphia on the way and gave this speech about the rules based global order and how important it was and multilateral institutions and how important they were. And, you know, she was she was going to kind of keep him under control, she was going to be the leader who was who was going to keep him on the straight and narrow now looks almost hilarious, doesn't it? Yeah, and, and, you know, to an extent, this is also politically interesting in that, you know, for all the time, and in the kind of accusations you can make, having an XPM kind of going slightly off piste is never easy for whoever is in number 10. And this is something that's been building up. I mean, she got very, very angry about this Brexit trade deal period when the Johnson government was saying that they were going to go back on international law. You know, she wasn't the only former tour lady who wasn't very pleased about that. But having a former prime minister in the Commons, who's still very respected amongst lots of conservative MPs is not necessarily going to be fun. No, it's really fascinating to watch her reincarnation, isn't it, as a backbench rebel? It's quite entertaining. Peter Walker, as always, thank you so much for joining me. Thank you very much. Despite reporting through one of the most chaotic years in UK politics, Peter somehow also found the time to write a book about the way everyday physical movement has vanished for the world and what it means for our health. Pretty apt for lockdown, eh? There'll be a link to his new book, The Miracle Pill, on today's episode description on the Guardian website. After the break, Severin Carell explains the impromptu Scottish Labour leadership contest, and I look behind the real meaning of levelling up. We'll be right back. Welcome back to Politics Weekly, I'm Heather Stewart. Now, with four months left to go before crucial parliamentary elections in Holyrood, the Scottish Labour Party is scrambling to find ways to contend with Nicola Sturgeon's Scottish National Party. My leadership was still the subject of speculation, and we are about to fight one of the most important elections in the history of the devolution era. In this report, the Guardian's Scotland editor Severin Carell examines the next steps for Labour in Scotland after the shock exit of its leader Richard Leonard. Last week, Scottish Labour's leader for the last three years, Richard Leonard, unexpectedly and suddenly resigned. I took the very difficult decision that the best thing that I could do for me and in the interest of the party was to step down. Leonard said that he'd been thinking about his leadership and the future of the Scottish Labour Party over the Christmas period. He thought, he said, that he hadn't been able to produce the right kind of criticisms and leadership in the face of the Covid pandemic. But Leonard had actually been under attack from within the party for some time. If we articulate a positive vision of change for the future, and if we all get 100% behind Jeremy Corbyn's leadership. He had been elected as Scottish Labour leader on the search of support for Jeremy Corbyn three years ago. He is on the Corbynite wing of the party, but he'd actually failed to produce much energy to the party. He had been regarded as lacklustre. Very few people in Scotland knew who he was. And he had actually withstood very narrowly a rebellion by a number of centrist Labour MSPs and trade union leaders back in September. Part of the problem, of course, is that Scottish Labour standing in the polls in Scotland is still very poor. There are around 30 to 35 points behind the Scottish National Party at around 18, 19% in the polls. And on that level of popular support, they're at risk of losing a number of their seats. And for the irony is, you see, is that Richard has said constantly that he only needs time to rebuild Labour. But at every single term, every time Scottish Labour is tested at the polls, Labour does pretty badly. The Scottish Labour Party, like the whole of the Labour Party, is a broad church. It brings together different perspectives and views on the left. But we are at our best when we are pulling together. As soon as Leonard resigned last week, senior figures inside the Scottish Labour Party realised they had very little time to organise a campaign to replace him. The big, big challenge for Scottish Labour is May's Scottish parliamentary elections. And with the SNP so far ahead in the polls, they're on track as things stand to win their second overall majority. And when they win a majority, there's a very, very widely held view that it would be pretty much impossible to withstand their requests for a second Scottish independence referendum. So they're hoping for a pretty fast election. They've arranged for the leadership election to happen by February 27. And there are two contenders. And as Sarwa... It's their true leadership right now is to heal the wounds in our country, to reunite our people and to rebuild our nation. And that work starts here. Son of a former Scottish Labour MP and in fact the UK's first Asian MP, Mohammed Sarwa, and as stood against Richard Leonard in the 2017 Labour Party election and lost to Richard Leonard. And the other contender will be Monica Lennon, a 40-year-old former councillor who, at the Scottish Parliament, has earned Claudette's and widespread respect for leading a campaign for Scotland to become the first country in the world to offer free period products. This bill shows what Parliament can do when we put aside our legitimate political differences and work together. One of the defining issues which has already emerged is that Monica Lennon believes that the Scottish Labour Party should accept the fact that there could well be a second independence referendum. Because during the general election, the build-up to it, UK politicians, including my leader Jeremy Corbyn, were asciptidously, what they would do. And that, for me, was quite an uncomfortable discussion. Now, I am not advocating for independence. And if so, should put forward an alternative to both independence or a Tory standard pro-union position. And they should campaign for Devo-Max, she calls it, maximum devolution or a form of federalism. Now, Sawaar is taking a much more orthodox position. He believes that Labour should campaign against a referendum and not accept that referendum is inevitable. But instead of focusing on recovery, the SNP and the Tories will want to take us back to divisive politics of old. But we can't go back to fighting between ourselves. Now, on the question about whether Sawaar would back further constitutional reform, I think the answer to that probably is yes. But the question is, what do they say about the specific question of whether Labour should accept the case for and the need for a second referendum? But I do accept that the status quo isn't working. And I don't accept the argument that if the status quo isn't working, the next thing you do is go to a referendum. I think there are other things. And of course, what happens with Scottish Labour is of immense significance for Kirst Armour and the UK Labour Party too. If Lenin's successor fails to turn around Labour's electoral fortunes and if Labour remains at around 80-90% in the polls, then there's a very good chance the SNP will win a majority. And that after COVID and with Brexit, the next challenge for the UK and the next challenge for Kirst Armour is going to be what Labour does if there's a second independence referendum. What Labour, UK level need is they need a resurgent Scottish Labour Party able to bring more Labour MPs to Westminster to allow Kirst Armour to put up a much more coherent and effective challenge to Boris Johnson and the Tories. You know, one of the reasons why I've made the decision that now is the time for me to go is because I want to see a united party. One of the R&D's of Richard Leonard's sudden resignation is of course the debate, the battle between Sarwar and Lenin, is that it will propel that debate into the headlines and propel it into public consciousness in a way that Leonard would probably have failed to do had he remained as party leader. The question then for both Lenin and for Sarwar is whether their policy debates become fractious or not. And if they do become fractious, if they become polarised, if they become intolerant or if their supporters start being polarising and tolerant, it could end up actually alienating more possible potential Labour voters. And we should say that at the time of recording, Anna Sarwar has the backing of more nominating parliamentarians than Monica Lennon. But of course, as with all of these things, we can't rule out Lennon just yet. Now it's a few weeks away yet, but many are gearing up to hear what the Chancellor Rishi Sunak has up his sleeve for the spring budget coming in March. So far, Sunak has been able to play a kind of hero in the pandemic, creating a furlough scheme and promising to continue to wrap his arms around the economy for as long as is necessary. In November, while launching his spending review, he was criticised for freezing the pay of many public sector workers, but was able to announce a new £4 billion levelling up fund that he said would pay for upgrading local infrastructure across the UK. This had economists wondering, what does the government actually mean by its promise to level up? And will the Treasury still be ready to foot the bill given the state of the public finances after the pandemic? This week, I spoke to Miata Farnbuller, Chief Executive of the New Economics Foundation, and Will Tanner, Director of the Centre Right Think Tank, onward. Miata levelling up, maybe we should start off by identifying the problem. Why is the UK in need of levelling up? It's something politicians and economists have been talking about for decades, isn't it? It is. And essentially, we have huge levels of regional inequality, and there is a big disparity between London, the southeast and the rest of the country. And I think it's become particularly prominent because we've always known we've had this, if you like, North-South divide. What's become increasingly clear is that even within that, there are some towns that are really, really struggling, that have not really rebounded back from the period of de-industrialisation that we had in the 80s and the 90s. We haven't seen new sort of industries, we've seen services that tend to be quite low paid, if that. And I think it all came to a head with the Brexit vote, where there was a sense that for parts of the country, the economic landscape was just not working for them. And people were very frustrated and very disgruntled. And that sense that, you know, communities were in effect left behind, I think, is something that punctured through the political consciousness of both the public, but importantly, the politicians. And this is when levelling up, I think, became a huge political issue. And I think it will be for a very long time. And well, you worked for Theresa May, didn't you, in a former life? She talked about white collar, had a concept, didn't she? White collar conservatism and talked about inequalities and so on. But you know, what does Boris Johnson in particular mean by levelling up? What Boris Johnson has done is define this specifically in regional terms. And the way he talks about it is that talent is everywhere. Talent is in every community in the country, but opportunity is not. There is a disparity between the opportunities which are available to people in some parts of the country compared to the opportunities available elsewhere. And I think what is really interesting about this is that there is an alignment, as Miata says, between some of the economic fundamentals. We know that London, for example, has been accelerating away from the country, for the rest of the country, for the last few decades. And the political fundamentals and the realignment that you saw in the 2019 election following the 2016 referendum, the kind of new political reality that faces the Conservative Party where they are suddenly the incumbent party in all of these Red Wall seats, which have been facing these challenges for a long period of time. But the Conservatives now has an incentive to do something about it. So there is a political imperative as well as an economic imperative for Boris Johnson to deliver on his promise of levelling up opportunity in those places. Miata, how would you measure, looking back, for example, in 2024, how much difference Boris Johnson has made? How much how and whether he's succeeded in this aim of levelling up? I suspect, as Will says, one of his ways of measuring it will be how many of those seats can he retain? But from a sort of economist perspective, how would we be able to see the difference? For me, the test of levelling up is not just a test of can you get the parts of the country to grow that weren't growing before, which is part of it. It has to translate into material improvements in people's living standards. You know, I think levelling up is being framed as a geographical problem. It is about the regional divide, and it is in part about the regional divide. But it also is about the divide between people. So even in, you know, parts of the country that have historically been doing, you know, relatively well, like London, we have huge pockets of deprivation. You have cities like Manchester that have grown in recent years, but we have huge pockets of deprivation. And I think if we simply see it as this place, Burnley, sees an uplifting living standard, that's enough in the aggregate, I think we would have failed. I think it's also about, well, you know, where there are disparities in terms of people's fortunes within places, we're also seeing the levelling up there as well. Well, I both agree and disagree. I think, and it is right to point to earnings and employment is probably the two best measures of progress. There are different reasons for that. But they include the fact that we measure those things regularly at a very granular local level so we can actually meaningfully measure progress on those outcomes. I think they're also the things that most voters approximate to economic opportunity to those are the things that are going to allow them to get on in life. I'm a bit more skeptical about the narrative that we need to be focusing as much on kind of deprivation in London as elsewhere, not because there isn't deprivation in London, but and Manchester and some of the other places that we had to mention, but because those areas have actually in the past been subject to really rigorous and focused regeneration attempts and have had a huge amount of money poured into them by government. And arguably, there's been an attempt to actually kind of overheat the economy of London to some degree at the expense of other parts of the country. And if you look at some of the statistics, it's really clear that London has been the kind of centre of lots of government enhanced centrifugal forces like R&D spending, transport spending. And that has driven some of the improvement in income and earnings and employment that London has benefited from that hasn't been the case in other places. So I do think it will require a bit of a refocusing and recognition that there are other parts of the country that perhaps need a bit more attention than London notwithstanding all of the challenges that the capital faces. Mia, so what are the policy failures do you think that mean we've ended up where we are? Obviously, Boris Johnson has this sense of a sort of fresh start, he's coming in, he's going to sort this problem out. Of course, we've had conservative governments for a long time. And as Will said, this is something that Labour governments talked about a bit as well, the North-South divide and so on. What are the policy mistakes or failures that mean that we've got here? So I think there are long term ones, and I think they're short term. I think this is an intractable problem for policymakers that's been around for a long time. And I think Will is right, there has not been enough focus on how we improve and build up parts of the country. And there's been too much of a focus, I think, in our economic development models, that the parts of the country that are doing well, London and the southeast, you chuck a whole load of investment at them, and they carry the rest of the country. And that clearly was the wrong strategy. I think in the short term, all of that has now been exacerbated by a decade of austerity, which has really hammered some of these communities, coupled with the lack of a clear industrial strategy. We talk the language of industrial strategy we have since 2008, but we've never actually done it properly, where we've looked at places, thought about their opportunities, their assets, their challenges, and then equipped people in those places with the resources and the wherewithal to actually respond. There's been a lot of rhetoric, but there hasn't been a lot of reality. And then you chuck COVID in the mix. And it is pretty, pretty tough. So I think the challenge is a big one. But we have a sense of the sorts of things that you need to do if you want to respond. Let's talk a bit more about solutions. Will, your think tank onward published a report on Monday called Leveling up the Tax System. And you were talking about ways the chancellor could use the tax system to try and narrow some of these gaps. Traditionally, we think more maybe about spending, don't we, on infrastructure or whatever. Talk us through what some of your recommendations were. We identify a number of taxes which are actually regionally regressive. So we think about taxes as kind of spatially blind. They apply equally to all people, but because people behave differently in different parts of the country, and there are different types of businesses in different parts of the country, they have markedly different burdens depending on where you are. So for example, council tax is very strongly skewed towards poorer regions and actually doesn't particularly burden London on average. So we recommended that one thing the chancellor could consider would be to reform Band A council tax to reduce the lowest band of council tax, and therefore put money back into the pockets of poorer households. That would benefit 54% of households in the Northeast, for example, compared to just 4% of households in London. So there are different ways that the chancellor can use the tax system to aid leveling up. And the kind of counterpoint is that if he doesn't use the tax system effectively, there's a risk that some of his tax changes might actually make leveling up harder. And that's one of the things you talk about, isn't it, that the treasury should publish analysis of the sort of regional impact of the changes that it's making. So at each budget, they publish charts, don't they, to show us how the incomes of the richest and the poorest will be affected. You think they should do that by region too, to sort of focus minds? Yeah, exactly. I mean, we're very used to those bar charts, which show the extent to which richer or poorer households are being affected by different tax reforms. Why don't we do the same by region so that we can understand the regional implications of different changes? I think it would drive a new type of debate about taxes, which is not just focused on the rich versus the poor, but also focused on the regional impact, which is clearly a big focus of this government. Without a doubt, there's a taxation piece. But what I would say is that I don't think the answer is necessarily just thinking about how we reduce the tax burden. I think we need to think about how we make the tax burden more progressive. But for something like council tax for business rates, I think we need a big overhaul of them anyway, in the context of devolving fiscal responsibility, so power over revenue raising, to the local, to the regional level, so that mayors and other bodies have the capacity to raise money in order to invest in the things that they think will make their economies better. And if we don't do that, we're just tinkering. We may reduce the tax burden a little bit for people, but we don't change the nature of their economy so that it works for them, and so that you deliver on the objective of levelling up. Well, how important is that devolution sort of piece of the puzzle, do you think? I think devolution is a really big part of levelling up. And we're very unlikely to solve some of the regional growth problems that this country has unless we solve the regional governance question, the kind of the higgledy-piggledy mishmash of different arrangements, which exist in different parts of the country, mayors in one place, counter-councilors in another. We need to reform that system so that not only is it simpler, but that those organisations have more power and a greater ability to be accountable to their local populations over economic as well as public service issues. Well, do you get the sense that government are willing to be bold enough about this? There might be a temptation to think, gosh, we're in the middle of a pandemic, we're looking at a recession, the public finances are in a terrible state, maybe now's not the time to do anything too radical or drastic. Well, I actually think we're in a very similar position to when we were during the Second World War, during all the debates around the beverage report and the kind of future of the welfare state in the post-war reconstruction era, and at that time you had Atlee and Churchill both looking to the kind of post-war period, as it were, and I'm sorry to do another kind of comparison between COVID and wartime because they are clearly very different, but I think there are similarities. And so you had Churchill and Clamatley looking to the post-war period and saying, we are going to need to make some big changes, but trying to do all of that in the middle of a crisis, a kind of period of war, is probably a bit impetuous and too soon. So I think we are in the period of debate where people are starting to look to the future and they are willing to be bold and certainly all the conversations I have with ministers, there's a kind of deep-seated desire to enact some really big reforms, but a recognition that to do it right now might be a little bit too soon. I completely agree with Wilbert, it feels that we are undergoing something that is hugely disruptive and traumatic in a way that the Second World War was, and that out of that rupture has to come something else. And certainly in rhetoric terms, ministers are talking about build back better, they're talking about the desire for us to recover better, but the test will be in action. And my nervousness is that definitely in rhetorical terms they're there, but every time they need to act, and I'm not talking about the emergency response to Covid, but I'm thinking about the things that lay the groundwork for the recovery. Say, for example, if you think about the piece that the Chancellor announced on the green recovery, which in rhetorical terms sounds brilliant, but when you look at the quantum, the amount that's been put towards green investment, it's paltry, and far, far dwarfs what we're seeing, for example, amongst our European counterparts. So there is a big chasm between what they're doing and what they're saying, and I hope that there is just enough political pressure and consensus, because I think there is consensus that something has to come out of this that's better, that forces them to act with a level of ambition that they absolutely must do. Can we get much clearer sense, hopefully, in the next few months to a year of how radical they're willing to be? Just an ask question to both of you. I wonder whether you think voters are watching, are focused on this issue of levelling up, and whether you think Boris Johnson will be punished in 2024 if he doesn't have something to show for that promise by then. Miata, what do you think? I think so. I mean, I don't know whether they will recognise or care about the phrase levelling up, but there was a clear promise that was made that if you come to us, we will make your lives better. Brexit will create the window for us to do that, and there will be sunny uplands. And I think if people don't feel that in their day-to-day lives, if they don't see that materially day-to-day, they're doing better, the prospect for their kids are better, but alongside that, their communities feel like they're starting to thrive and improve, he will be held to count, and rightly so. I think the Conservatives went into the last election with three messages, get Brexit done, ditch Jeremy Corbyn and level up opportunity. They've done two, they now need to deliver the third, and the pandemic has gone in the way, but that's not going to stop voters expecting some serious results by 2024. Will Tanner and Riatavarn Bullert, thank you very much. Thank you. Great to be on. And that's all from us this week. Meanwhile, Lord Sedwell, the ex-head of the civil service, claimed that Boris Johnson would not have been happy if Donald Trump had won a second term in office, as many commentators had assumed. Whether that's true or not makes little difference now anyway, of course, as Donald Trump spends his last few hours as President, escaping Washington DC, and avoiding the inauguration of Joe Biden. The world will be watching today as Biden takes the oath of office, hoping that his tenure turns out to be a smoother one than his predecessors, which ended with riots in the Capitol. Tomorrow Jonathan Friedland and Richard Wolff look at how inauguration day went, so make sure to look out for that in the Politics Weekly feed. But for now, I want to thank our guests, Peter Walker, Severin Carell, Miatavarn Bullert, and Will Tanner. The producer is Danielle Stevens. I'm Heather Stewart. Please look after yourselves, and thanks, as always, for listening. For more great podcasts from The Guardian, just go to theguardian.com slash podcasts.