 This is The Guardian. It's the moment we'd all been waiting for and it finally happened today. Given the situation, I cannot deliver the mandate on which I was elected by the Conservative Party. Liz Tras, the country's second Prime Minister this year, has resigned after just 45 days in office. We've agreed that there will be a leadership election to be completed within the next week. Sir Graham Brady has confirmed that there'll be a new leader of the Conservative Party by Friday, 28th of October. But in the middle of an economic crisis, can the Conservative Party find a leader that will unify the party and be accepted by the country? I'm Gabby Hinslopin for John Harris and you're listening to Politics Weekly UK for the party. Joining me today is The Guardian's political editor, Pippa Krura. Pippa, thanks so much for joining us on a really busy day. Hello. Thanks for having me. Here I am in my office in Westminster and the government's fallen apart around me. Fortunately, however, you're still there. The Prime Minister, however, has resigned. Liz Tras today announced her position was no longer tenable after a chaotic seven days, which saw her sack her Chancellor and her Home Secretary, Uten, on her flagship economic policy and lose the confidence of her MPs. I came into office at a time of great economic and international instability. Families and businesses were worried about how to pay their bills. Putin's illegal war in Ukraine threatens the security of our whole continent and our country has been held back for too long by low economic growth. I was elected by the Conservative Party with a mandate to change this. We delivered on energy bills and on cutting national insurance. And we set out a vision for a low tax, high growth economy that would take advantage of the freedoms of Brexit. I recognise though, given the situation, I cannot deliver the mandate on which I was elected by the Conservative Party. I have therefore spoken to His Majesty the King to notify him that I am resigning as leader of the Conservative Party. Just to sit back for a minute and reflect on this, I mean it does feel like one of the most surreal weeks I think I've ever experienced before. Is that your feeling? What's it felt like down there today? I definitely agree with that. I mean we've got to this sort of position where we become immune really to this sort of scale of political drama because there's been so much of it over the last few years. Politics, British politics has been a very tumultuous place and particularly in the last six months with the demise of Boris Johnson and the Tory leadership contest, we've got used to a lot of drama in our lives. But yet despite that, I think what we've seen this week with going back to last Friday onwards really with the resignate or the sacking of of Quasi-Quartang, Truss's Chancellor, the sacking of her Home Secretary, Sorella Brieverman and a real sort of chaos unleashed on the Tory party in votes and in Parliament as number 10 is really struggling. This Truss specifically was struggling to maintain control of her party. It feels like, I'm not sure we've ever seen anything quite like it. I mean there were some moments during the Brexit wars of 2019 where it got pretty close but the last few days have been pretty staggering. It's the speed of it as much as anything else, the speed with which it feels like it's all fallen apart, you know, and the way in which it feels like kind of years have been telescoped in today's. I mean I already feel like Quasi-Quartang's resignation was something that happened last year and actually it was kind of last Friday, you know, you get this sense of everything on hyperspeed. Delaber and Peay said to me this week, I'm kind of sick of living in unprecedented times, it'd be quite nice to have some like, precedented ones. Well I do know what was going on. Well that's their home of course because they see Keir Starmer as being sort of, you know, the off, his off big offer to the British public is that he's stable and steady and dare I say it's a bit boring and actually we could all do a subordinate our lives at the moment. The actual, I mean the actual resignation speech was very short, it was unlike, I mean it wasn't like Theresa May who was very tearful, it wasn't like Boris Johnson who was sort of clearly angry, kind of felt to me quite unrepentant really. It was just, you know, well especially when she started talking about her mandate, you know, like obviously the work must carry on without me. It was very perfunctory wasn't it? It was sort of business, businessman-like or businesswoman-like, 203 words I think in total. She came out said the absolute bare minimum of what she needed to do, turned on a heel and went back in through that famous black door and I think this is, shouldn't really been a surprise because frankly every public statement, speech, interview Liz Chastis has done, I mean they're clearly not her forte, she is a bit wooden, she lacks that sort of emotional connectivity that so many other politicians have that you really need to be able to sort of persuade people that what you're saying you really mean and I was really struck by that on the the interview she did with the BBC on, was it Monday night on losing track, where she apologized for the first time, said she was sorry for the impact that her mistakes had, the impact her mistakes had had and she said the same again at Prime Minister's question time on Wednesday and it didn't sound like she meant it so I think there's probably very little contrition there, I suspect she feels she's been very badly done by, that she didn't get the support she needed, that her plan for a radical economic reform and growth was the right one, maybe she'd concede it was the wrong time but right to the end despite the apologies she still maintains that it was her desire to push ahead with this growth strategy when quite clearly the country, the economy, the markets, the people required stability. And more than her desire as well when she started, when she did talk about her mandate in that way, like she's obviously never had a mandate from actual voters but it felt to me like a very coded way, you know, warning of saying this is what the membership wanted, this is what we're supposed to be delivering, whoever succeeds me is supposed to keep on delivering this, whereas the whole point of what MPs have just done is to absolutely repudiate what, you know, say never again are we doing trussonomics, you know, whoever follows us, this isn't the path we go down and she doesn't seem to accept that. I almost wondered if she sounded almost as if she was expecting to be offered a job by the whoever comes in next, you know, interesting. I do think it is interesting though, isn't it? Because, you know, we've been through, as we've said, some really turbulent times politically in the last few years. We've had Brexit, we've had the pandemic, which I mean, talking about unprecedented, that really was for this country. We've got war on the fringes of Europe and Ukraine and we were in the middle of a cost of living crisis, so there's some really tough challenges and nobody's suggesting that it wasn't a really difficult, a difficult hand that she was dealt. I think what we are, everybody has concluded, particularly her Tory MPs, was that it was a difficult hand but she pleaded very, very badly. And, you know, all the language from her about mandate just really falls flat because, as you rightly identify, it was the mandate from Conservative Party members, not the electorate. And I think the vast majority of people in the country were looking at the government right now and thinking, God, it's the third Prime Minister, isn't it time for an election? At what point do we get a look in? Well, we'll come back to that in a minute, but I just want to go back first deep into history, i.e. 24 hours ago, when all of this sort of first sort of started to fall apart and you got the sense of the wheels coming off, so on Wednesday afternoon we had what should have been really a fairly routine piece of parliamentary mischief by the Labour Party over fracking and, you know, motion to ban fracking, which was actually, obviously, originally the Tory manifesto position but been recently by Liz Truss. Can you explain how quite they managed to mess that up so badly that it ended up with the Chief Whip allegedly resigning, been on resigning, possibly, who knows now? It was very poor management, wasn't it? I mean, ultimately, these opposition day debates are a fairly common feature of parliamentary life and they're an opportunity for the opposition to choose a subject that it wants to debate and to put the government, the Tory MPs in this case, in an awkward position. So we've seen them on free school meals, for example, last year where Tory MPs abstained and then spent the next few months facing criticism from Labour that they had voted against increasing free school meals. The standard government response to these things is to ignore them, to abstain, but the difference this time round is that Labour used a clever tactic which has only been used a couple of times before, which is to make the vote about granting time on the order paper. So they had the opportunity to do a pathway, if you like, to legislation. So the vote was about Labour taking control of the order paper and having what would be a binding vote on fracking. Now, the only time, other times, this has happened in recent history, is that famous day, talking about dramatic days, back in 2019 at the height of the Brexit wars when Oliver Letwin and his crew took hold of the order paper and pushed through votes to make sure that we wouldn't have a no-deal Brexit. 21 Tory MPs were then sacked, they lost the Tory whip, the rest is history. But it's that sort of level of of rarity in terms of that device being used. So the government was in a really tricky position. They had two choices. They could either ignore, as usual, the opposition day debate, pretend it wasn't happening, get their MPs to abstain, deal with sort of minor political upset as a result of it, but you know, these things happen over time. Or because the big problem was that actually it allowed an opportunity for Labour to legislate. So because of that, they felt that they had to make it a three-line whip, they had to encourage the MPs to vote it down, because that was kind of like a red line. You can't suddenly hand over the order paper to the opposition, that would undermine the government's authority even more than it had been already undermined. So they were kind of stuck between a rock and a hard place between these two choices. They opted to make a three-line whip. More than that, they opted to make a confidence vote in the whole government. And they made this ridiculous toing and froing at the last minute, where a minister announced, apparently because of miscommunication number 10, and then the comments that it wasn't going to be a confidence vote. And then you had the likes of Therese Coffey and Jacob Wussmaug, apparently physically manhandling MPs to get them to vote the right way. I mean, it was just complete chaos. So you have these extraordinary scenes where nobody knows whether or not it's a confidence vote, whether or not they should vote for it. As you say, lots of allegations of pushing and shoving, Wendy Morton supposedly resigning in the middle of it and then on resigning. I can't even say what the deputy chief alleged to say. You need a few asterisks in there. Yeah, leave that to your ripe imaginations, God in business. And this of course is against, you know, a backdrop of what else is going on. So the Home Secretary, you know, essentially being fired over what looks like, I mean, I'm not saying that it's not a serious potential breach of security to send emails from your mobile phone when you're the Home Secretary, but it's the kind of thing that would have been forgiven under previous administrations. I think there's 10 things and I think that yes, you can see that situation, you can see a situation where that would have been forgiven in other circumstances. But there was a second element to it, which is that the information that she shared was about immigration policy and specifically the impact of immigration policy potentially on growth forecasts, which are a key part of the budget and therefore market sensitive. So there was that sort of double element and that's the reason that number 10 gave for her being sacked. However, people in number 10 do admit that it was convenient timing. I mean, Sihwela Bruverman has not been a help very helpful to this trust or had not been very helpful to this trust during the course of her premiership, not least by suggesting that net migration should be in the tens of thousands when trust wanted to be able to have to control it, but to be able to have freedom to increase skilled migration in order to be able to boost growth. So there was a big, apparently big shouting match between the two of them over that. And also somebody else told me that Jeremy Hunt, obviously the new chancellor, obviously an extremely powerful man now, had decided that he didn't want to be sitting in the cabinet, which had people that he regarded as clowns, and that there was a few people sitting around the table that he thought actually went up to the job. Now they deny that, they say that he's not had any role in personnel. It all kind of fits with this picture of trust having to relinquish control over pretty much every aspect of our government. There was an issue with the way it was put to me as well was that there's a direct conflict between economic policy now and so well at Brettman's position. I mean, one of the sort of bits of the trust growth plan that you might've wanted to keep was the idea she was advancing that, you know, they've overdone it on immigration controls that, you know, you should have a slightly more relaxed economic policy that's starting to harm economic growth. You know, and she had publicly contradicted that, just as she publicly contradicted tax cuts, just as she publicly suggested there was some kind of remainer coup going on. I remember looking at her for the last two weeks thinking, I don't, I can't quite understand how she's still, you know, you can't continue to be homesick. She openly disagree with your, your prime minister all the time. And it turns out that that's true. But in this case, perhaps you can't continue to be prime minister either. But anyway, so you move on to, to Grant Shapps, is homesick for what, possibly a day? Well, it depends. Until there's a new one, possibly a week then. Do you think that was, do you think the fracking vote was the final straw? What tipped things there? Because originally it seemed as if the Hunt plan was to sort of, to keep the prime minister there until at least October the 31st to have this stability, to not have a sort of wildly unpredictable political, you know, leadership contest that where the markets would sort of panic again. And it felt as if something was running out of its control after that or running out of government. Yeah. And some of Truss's allies, not just Hunt, but some of Truss's allies had said that that was the plan, that they wanted to try and keep her in place to calm things down until the next fiscal statement happened. And then hopefully from their perspective, she would be able to buy herself a little bit more time. With that, things would stabilize a little bit. I think the problem came with all these different things happening yesterday. And there was also stuff about one of her closest aides being suspended, her performance of prime minister question time. There's all these different elements. And you've had all these Tory MPs saying, well, for weeks really, privately, but increasing numbers publicly that Truss wasn't up to the job. And I think what happened at the end of yesterday was that there was a recognition among a significant number of those Tory MPs that she was out of control and therefore the party was out of control, therefore the country was. And that actually that meant that there was more danger of damage being done, both to the party's electoral prospects, but also much more importantly to the economy, by keeping her in post for the next 10 days than there was by getting rid of her and potentially having an unsettling week or so when they choose a new prime minister, but meaning that she was out of the picture. So that I think was the calculation that was made last night. It was the tipping point of people that they thought this chaos can't continue, it was actually worse to keep her in post. At what point did you get the feeling that she was definitely, definitely going? Did you get an early hint for the 130? We've been humming and ahing about it all really for the last 24 hours. I think my instinct was that, because we'd heard this so much from it from ministers and MPs, that they would try and cling on until the end of the week. But I think overnight it became clear that she was in a very difficult position. I first heard from number 10 sources about half an hour before they were going to make a statement that one was coming. We weren't 100% clear what that statement was going to say. We assumed it was that she was going to stand down, but you know, gotta be careful about these things, don't want to get it wrong. So we wrote a quite careful story at that point, saying she was going to make a statement and it was prompting further speculation that she was about to quit. And then lo and behold, as with the whole trust premiership, everything was truncated before we knew it, there were the handymen from number 10 wheeling out the the smart wooden new lectern that we last saw when she addressed the country after the queen died. But this time just six short weeks later to announce her resignation. Yeah, talking of truncated, I think that her premiership lasted less time than the leadership elections, which is pretty, pretty rough. She's also the shortest serving ever British Prime Minister. It's not really great. Anyway, this new leadership election is going to last a week. So that's the record for the next prime minister to be, I guess. And it looks now as if so we should have a new prime minister by Friday, the 28th of October. So Graham Brady was out this afternoon giving a bit more detail about about how it's going to work. And it looks as if there's going to be a pretty high threshold of nominations to join the race. I mean, it looks like an attempt to weed out all the sort of no-hopers, letting it be known they're taking soundings. It's very significant, actually, that the threshold is that high. It's quite clear that they don't want as broad a field as they had during the last leadership contest when I think the Soveta 9 MPs went for it for the first time. So it's 100 nominations now, isn't it? You need 100. The nomination threshold to run in the first place is 100. And they've got to 2pm on Monday to announce, to declare that they've got those nominations. And it could be the case, as you say, they want to wrap it up by Friday, but it could be the case that if only one candidate at that point has 100, then that candidate becomes the next prime minister. So it could wrap up very, very quickly. And the other thing that Graham Brady and the Tory Potter chair, Jake Berry said is that if MPs can't agree on one unity candidate and pick two, then there will be, the vote will go to members. It'll be very quick online members vote so that they would get to say. And my feeling very much is that... But do we know how binding that's going to be? Like a snap online poll of... Well, it would be absolutely binding. And they claim that sort of security concerns that have been expressed about how safe that would be from foreign interference and stuff are misguided and that the system is very secure. But of course, we saw what happened during the Tory leadership contest when they initially, the first one, and initially suggested members would be able to get an online vote at the end to change their position or to launch their position for the first time. And they would do that because of security concerns. But the special thing, Gabby, I think is also interesting because of course, the minute Truss resigned, focus shifted forward as to who was going to take over. And one of those names doing around was inevitably Boris Johnson, who friends have been saying for weeks now that he wanted, that he felt that his premiership had been cut off at the knees, that he didn't think he'd done everything he wanted to do and that he was keen for a comeback. And it might have happened sooner than he expected, but he's on holiday in the Caribbean at the moment. And we're hearing that he was heading for the airport to get a flight straight back. But there's hardly anybody who's spoken to Westminster that thinks that Boris Johnson would be able to hit that threshold of 100 MPs. That is probably somewhere between 40 and 60 at best, which means that he would have to rethink and not throw his hat into the ring after all, which a lot of MPs who regard him as very divisive, he's still got the party gate inquiry hanging over him, I think would be, you know, is a relief. There's probably a moment to play a clip from Charles Walker, the Tory MP who went viral this week with a warning really to Tory MPs who use their vote for their own personal advancement in the last leadership contest. I'm livid. And you know, I really shouldn't say this, but I hope all those people that put Liz Truss in number 10, I hope it was worth it. I hope it was worth it for the Minister of Red Box. I hope it was worth it to sit around the Cabinet table because the damage they have done to our party is extraordinary. Sorry, it's very difficult to convey. You look just furious about this. I am. I've had enough. I've had enough of talentless people putting their tick in the right box, not because it's in the national interest, but because it's in their own personal interest to achieve ministerial position. So we're back really to that, aren't we, Pippa, sort of relying on conservative MPs to cast a vote in their national interest? Yeah, here we are again. And the opposition, Labour, Lib Dems and the SNP have all called for a general election instead, saying that we're now so far removed from the electoral mandate that was won by the Conservatives in 2019. Two PM is on the two PM zone that really they need their own fresh mandate. The risk at the moment is continuing with this chaos, not having a stable Labour government. So that's why there should be a general election. We can't just allow the Tory party to keep putting up the next candidate in the middle of this chaos. There is a choice. There's a Labour party that's capable of stabilising the economy, has a clear plan and the public entitled to choose between that stable Labour government and this utter chaos of the Conservatives. I think, though, that that's still less likely to happen imminently than it is likely, because the Tories are still about 30 points behind Labour in the polls. And while that might not actually be replicated to the general election, even a leader by 15 percent of the polls would deliver a Labour, a healthy majority. And so conservative MPs would be looking at themselves out of power, potentially for a generation of many of them losing their seats. And as one MP said, or as many MPs say, there's nothing as an ex MP in terms of their own employment prospects. So I think from a Tory perspective, there would be huge reluctance to give into those demands for a general election. Labour people are kind of split on it. There's one group of Labour MPs that think they what they want to do is to take over now as soon as possible, because the damage that could be done to the economy in the next two years is so immense that they want at least to be able to have a chance to sort of shape things and get out of this economic situation their own way. And there are those who think that there are global factors at play, which mean that the economic crisis is likely to continue for a good couple of years. And actually having someone like Hunt in that is going to try and sort of balance the books a bit means that they could potentially be taking over a healthy economy in two years time, albeit probably still facing some tough choices. So although they're publicly calling for an election, there are some that think actually we wouldn't be waiting until 2024 anyway. So I don't think one is imminent. We should quickly just say who's definitely not running. Jeremy Hunt has ruled himself out of the running, although it doesn't often necessarily stop him remaining as Chancellor, whoever it ends up being. Michael Go said he wouldn't run. James Cleverley, the Foreign Secretary said he wouldn't. And Tom Tugenhart, who ran last time, wouldn't run either. There is some speculation about a sort of, I mean, this is what Torian Peter kind of trying to agree in the last few days, but didn't get there within time, but of some kind of triumvirate or whatever the force, I'm equivalent to that is, I can't remember. But where you have a combination of Rishi Sunak, Penny Mordent, Gove and sort of whoever, that sort of non Boris Johnson, vaguely progressive, vaguely sort of centrist sort of conglomeration that comes together and stops taking votes off each other. Do you think that's a go? I mean, obviously hasn't been a goer for the last few days. And if so, who do you think emerges at the head of it? Because that seems to be the question. Someone would have to stand back and let, you know. And that's the problem is that none of them want to stand back. Those think they could make it to the top two or three. The obvious front runners Rishi Sunak, because he came first amongst Tori MPs last time. But there is a sort of a chunk of Boris Johnson supporting MPs, it was 40 to 60, that absolutely would do everything in their power to stop him. And there are others in the party as well that wouldn't back him necessarily. But I think given that he got over 100 at the final round of the MPs contest, we could expect that, certainly we expect him to make the ballot. Then it comes into who comes into second place. Now Penny Morden came third behind this trust just by handful of votes in the last leadership. And the expectation is that she would go through, faced with the choice between Rishi Sunak and Penny Morden. It'd be interesting to see what members would do in that online poll. Last time, the suggestion was that Penny Morden would be amongst the members. Whether that's still the case, having been through the contest once and given the economic situation we're now in, we'll have to wait and see. But it certainly feels like it's between the two of them. Now whether one or other of them is prepared to stand back, I doubt very much. It might reach the point that you get a first round of voting amongst MPs and then it becomes clear that one of them is the front runner and they agree to do a deal. And so for example, Rishi Sunak takes over at number 10, keeps Jeremy Hunt as his chancellor because I think there was a real sort of requirement for stability that they all recognise, and that Penny Morden gets pretty much any other job she wants, whether that's home or foreign or something else entirely. Dept Prime Minister even. That would seem to be where sort of the centrist MPs are trying to head towards, but you know, there's a long way to go and a lot of MPs to win over to get there. Talking of the economic situation we're in, I suppose the final question is, what is Liz Truss's legacy, if that doesn't sound like a mad thing to say of someone who's been there for all of six weeks? I mean, she was outlasted by a lettuce, but that's probably not the legacy she wanted. I'm not sure it's a very positive legacy really. I think it's a sort of an extra black hole in the British economy, in British public finances of anywhere between £10 and £20 billion that will now have to be filled because of a disastrous mini budget. It's an extra maybe 1%, 2% on people's mortgage interest rates, but from a political perspective it is the end of any hopes or dreams that the libertarian free market right may have had for imposing their form of ideology on British politics. That is dead for a generation. What we're going to see is much more of the status quo, the much maligned Treasury orthodoxy, and maligned by Liz Truss, I should say, and a much more sort of like conventional, potentially stable type of politics, because that's what the public's asking for. And after this failed experiment of Trussonomics, I think that's what they'll get. And 20 years of economic liberal saying, oh, but communism was never properly tried. If only she'd timed the budget differently. If only she was a presentation result, then we'd be fine. Anyway, listen, I need to let you go because you've got masses to do tonight, but thank you so much for your time, Pippa. Thanks for having me. And thank you for listening. I hope you enjoyed today's episode. If you did, make sure you subscribe to Politics Weekly UK, wherever you get your podcasts. And if you want more analysis on this extraordinary week in British politics, tune in to our sister podcast, Today in Focus. This episode was produced by Frankie Toby, music by Axel Kupute, the executive producers are Maas Eptahaj and Nicole Jackson. This is The Guardian.