 This is The Guardian. Two by-elections are about to take place that will tell us a lot about the immediate future of the government and the opposition. So we're on the road again. Our first stop is in the West Country in the formerly ultra-safe Tory seat of Tiverton and Honiton. I've been a lifelong conservative sport. They're just liars mate. You know, they treat the general public with disdain. A lot of people here are angry not least about Boris Johnson and the Lib Dems think they might just pull off one of the biggest upsets in electoral history. In Yorkshire, Keir Starmer and his party are in the midst of a massive push to retake Wakefield, which the Tories took off them in 2019. It's been there before, lots of years before then. So we'll have Labour back. What we quickly discover in both places is that things aren't nearly as simple as they might seem. I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Weekly UK for The Guardian. I'm back on the road again with this podcast producer, Maz, in a very large constituency of Tiverton and Honiton, or specifically Tiverton itself, where Neil Parrish resigned his seat after watching pornography on his phone in the House of Commons chamber. It doesn't look dissimilar. It's a solid West Country market town. Probably had a cattle market, might still have one. Everyone comes in for the surrounding villages to meet each other and do the shopping and there's quite a sort of civic sense here, isn't there? This is a bit of power and influence locally. It's got a very big church. Union Jack's still out. We may be in middle England. No, he's not quite in middle. As ever, some of the story unfolds as we chew it over in the car. Genuinely want to know what the policies are going to be that swing a conservative to a Libda. Oh, I don't think that's about policy. What is it? I don't think you'll hear people saying with their newly introduced windfall tax. I think that's all. He's newly on the side of working people like me. No, but what they will say. Nobody does that. I bet you we're going to meet a lot of people who say Boris Johnson made a mistake. Let's just get on with XYZ. It's your people, Mez. No, I just, I'm surprised at that, but I just think that that's what people need. They're around. We only call them recently, Melissa. Okay, what about the market? Where is the market? The first location is Tiverton's Town Centre and immediately we meet a somewhat shy Tory. She asks where we're from and we can tell she's a bit reluctant to answer that question. Are you in the part of Devon where there's a by-election next Thursday? Well, yes. Are you going to vote next Thursday? Probably. Do you know who you're going to vote for? Probably. I'm not going to tell you. You're not? No. Are you changing your vote compared to how you voted last Thursday? I'm considering. What's life like at the moment in Tiverton? Like all these other towns around, you know, a lot of things that are closed. But no, I mean it's always a bit sad, isn't it? But it's everywhere to work for the whole country's like this, isn't it? What did it used to be like? Pretty good. Thriving. I'm not going to answer any more questions. Let me ask you one more question. So you might change the way you vote. I don't think I will, but I might. I threw them decided really. What's your opinion of how the government's doing at the moment? I think Boris needs a second chance, to be honest. Yes, I think what he did was completely wrong, but I mean two minds because I think he's had a really, really tough time. The second chance is because you feel like he's got more to give. Yes. In what way? I think he's a pretty bright cookie, actually. And I think he's had a rough time with Covid and Brexit. And I think you actually could get his hands on this. Very good. Lovely to meet you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. We screwed them. Oh, that was good. No, it's interesting. I don't know. Thank you. Thank you. So straight off, Maz, you must be feeling we found your people already. I said that we'd be surprised, wouldn't we? The oval of tribe of Boris excuses. Boris second chances, I think. Care work is one of the biggest sources of employment in Tipperton. And we really hit the jackpot when we meet the care workers, Gary and Diane. Can I ask you a very quick question? What do you think it's about? Can you get no idea? There's a by-election here next Thursday. Lib Dems totally lost faith in the Tory party. Go on. What did you vote conservative last time? I've been a lifelong conservative supporter. Tell me why you've lost faith. They're just liars, mate. You know, they treat the general public with disdain. Did you sort of have a bit of faith and trust in Boris Johnson at the start? I did through the Brexit sort of, you know, events. And we seem very passionate about everything he's done since then since he's been in power. No, totally lost faith in the guy. What are the things that stick out that really sort of chase it, mate? The way that we've had laws and rules imposed upon us and they just, they've laughed at us, haven't they? You know, basically. I mean, we both work in care. So we've been, you know, quite affected by it in our private lives and work. We're still following rules set down by the government, you know, that restrict us and restrict people that we work with and restrict residents. Have you ever voted a Democrat before? No. What, you've always voted conservative? Yeah, I can't go Labour, I'm afraid. That's too much of a swing for me. What would it take for you to swing back? You'd say you vote Lib Dems and Dan wins. Yeah, so you vote Tory again. What would, yeah, is it Boris... A complete change of their lineup at the moment. That's in parliament. Yeah, you need, I think they're so detached from reality, the fact that, you know, he can stand there and blatantly lie about things. And it's not even the lies, it's the fact he's treating the whole population like a bunch of idiots that can't see he's lying. He's Teflon coated, the guy, like, you know. Well, he may well find out. Maybe Tim it and I'll take a bit of the Teflon off. Well, I think the whole of the Southwester will, to be honest with you. Yeah, I feel a bit, I live in the Southwester, I live in Somerset. Lovely to meet you. Bye guys. Thank you. Totally done great. Amazing. It's one all. One all. Yeah. I mean... That's quite a thing, isn't it? Usual caveat, non-scientific, it's not a representative sample. He's furious. Yeah. And he's voted Tory all his life. But as we've said all along, you know, we've been, God knows, we've been talking about this on the podcast for months, haven't we? Most political scandals are quite complicated. They take a bit of explaining. This one's very vivid, you know. We told you to live like this for two years in this almost impossible way. And you did it. And we had no intention of following our own rules. People are bound to be furious. Right. Let's go. Well, you Sarah. Why? Because we're journalists, we work for the Guardian. Yeah. Bless you, you're right. It's a hard life. Do you know what I mean? Got to feed my kids somehow. Totally. Well, we found you on Facebook. Did you? Yes. How long has your business been in? I've been here 10 years, only in this business. Okay. Can we talk to you for a minute? Yeah, you can. How's Tivett and doing? Depends where you are, actually. Down in Westex, which is where we are at the moment, we're doing okay. We're holding our head above water. How do you feel about the by-election next week? How? Where do you want me to begin? Go on, anywhere. Well, I was a Conservative. I'm no longer a Conservative at all. When did it stop? When did it stop? I think probably Theresa May, actually. Yeah. And it slowly got worse and worse and worse. Yeah. And I think also what doesn't help is that none of them have actually done a day's work in their lives. That really galls me. Boris Johnson's been a newspaper columnist. Oh, wow. But he's not been behind a counter and he's not listened to Audrey. He's got some terrible disease on her foot. He's not going to work in Heathcoats on the shop floor. You know, the man's deluded. Sorry, he's deluded. So, yeah. But you said your sort of affinity or support for the Conservative party started to slide when Theresa May was around. Well, she was a wet boss as well, wasn't she? When did you, when was the last time you were any of your family voted Conservative? Yeah, when I got this, actually, because you see a different life. Wow. When you start working for yourself and you see what's going on, you realise what's going on. What's going on? Not a lot, really. They don't work for the common man. None of them do. I am one of those people that when he was having a party, I couldn't say goodbye to my mother who was dying in the hospice. OK? I had to lean through a window. And if it wasn't for the fantastic people of Hospice Care, I would not have seen her, but I couldn't hold her hand. I couldn't tell her I loved her. So I'm angry about that. Really angry about that. And he thinks it'll all go away. Well, it doesn't all go away, does it? That's hurtful because we all abided by the rule and the regulation. And if Boris goes, will you... I will applaud. There you go. What's your biggest selling cake? The best one that everybody likes is the old English much. While we're chatting to Sarah and deciding which cake to buy, something remarkable happens. Well, I vote Conservative and I still vote Conservative. Wow. I'll never give up voting Conservative. Really? Because I wouldn't give my vote to Liberal Democrats because I think they're a waste of space. And Labour, they're just a waste of... A point in voting Conservative. About his parties and the idea that he's told lies and all that. How do you feel about that? I know all that. I feel they shouldn't have done it. It wasn't just him. He didn't go to all these parties. He's only been found guilty for a couple. And there's hundreds and thousands of people in this country that did exactly the same. Did you? No. Neither did I. Neither did I. Because I'm not a guy. But there is still hundreds and thousands of people in this country that did. Okay. And then if you can leave that aside, the question of the sort of job the government's doing for the country and where we're all going, how do you feel about that at the minute? Well, Labour wouldn't have done no different than he did through this Covid. I think Rishi did fantastic for the people without looking after them with their money. And they're still trying to do it now. That's it. There's the two sides. There's the two sides. So that's all this election's all about. It's whether your side wins or your side wins. They're all a load of crap. So don't worry about it. Hear, hear to that. Right, good. A bit of consensus at the end. A little bit of agreement. 15 minutes drive from Tiverton is Columpton. We're driving there to meet dairy farmer Jonathan Gibbons. We still have roots in this farm. We own no sugar. We're meant to be left. But it's all right now. It's fine. Still got time. Just follow it in there. Farming is a very important industry in these parts. And the former Tory MP Neil Parris was well liked because of his support for local farmers. But they're now facing serious problems. We're in an agricultural part of the world here really, aren't we? Absolutely. Yeah. And not just agriculture. You'll see just how green everywhere is. It's dairy and livestock really, predominantly. Jonathan has 450 cows. He's an organic farmer who serves big companies like mullah yogurt. Just in case you're wondering why we don't hear many moves, he tells us it's because the cows here are content and they don't tend to move. So these are starting from newborn, just in that pen there. And then these have been 12 weeks old up there. Yeah. And how's trade at the minute? What's farming like? So it's been a very difficult year. We've had had huge increases in costs as most of the country has. But it starts with fuel. Everything we buy in has gone up. So any feed for the cows that we've had to buy in has gone up. I'm sure we remember the haulage crisis. That's when everything really pushed up because there's so much haulage involved in the food chain and it just put everything up. And what about Brexit? Yeah, that's had a huge impact on us. Yeah. You didn't vote for Brexit. I didn't vote for Brexit and there was certainly food production was not given a second thought following Brexit. In particular with things like the labour shortage. It's so exactly what we're talking about, the transport that's caused unnecessary, I think, inflation. Yeah, they very much have mislabeled and misunderstood farm work and it's caused a lot of problems. What does that mean for you? We're personally on the farm, very lucky. We have excellent staff. We're okay. I know other farmers around here have stopped because of lack of good labour. And they just stopped farming. Absolutely. So the cows stopped. We recorded with Jonathan before the government's food strategy was published, but we got the sense he felt his voice hadn't been listened to up to that point. How are you going to vote next week? I would say not conservative at the moment. And have you voted conservative in the past? I have, yeah, because I've always felt they probably used to be the party you think understood food production better and would perhaps have it more in the forethought. But I think I probably put them number three out the main parties now. Close number one. Both Lib Dems and Labour, from what I've seen, have been making the right noises. They understand about we don't want to produce abroad. We need to produce here. So I'd probably vote Lib Dem. But at the moment, if there's a choice of who's in government, I probably would choose Keir Starmer, I think, the head of Boris. Farmers for Starmer. Yeah. You know, from what you're saying, it feels like you've been ignored or left behind or there's a certain attitude towards farming that's not been very kind of nice, really. But you seem quite calm about it. You don't seem particularly annoyed. I think that's just my exterior. Underneath I'm angry. Because it is quite serious. It is serious. And it is, I think it's the arrogance that comes over from the government towards farming. Farming is very hard. It's hard work. You know, we're up at three in the morning and quite often to late at night. And you do feel undervalued and misunderstood, I think you just want a government that sort of listens and perhaps doesn't doesn't you don't feel is against you. Not even supported that's felt there against us and against domestic food production. No one's very happy in Britain at the moment. This is not we were encouraged to believe in the different distant days of 2019 when Boris Johnson won that election. I suppose the idea was that politics would sort of recede and go quiet because Brexit would be done. And then this sort of jovial, jokey, Sun King man would lift the nation's mood. And that's just not happened because Brexit, you know, the various downsides of that are steadily revealing themselves. We just been through and arguably are still in the pandemic. And there's all this other stuff kicking around. Everyone feels as if they're not being listened to somehow. But it's fascinating. God, it wasn't. I'm old enough to remember the 1990s. We were encouraged to believe that most things have been sorted out and everyone was content. We're not there anymore. Oh, it would have been podcast if we didn't mention the nice. Got to mention the 90s. Goodbye. Far off forgotten. 90s. Why does that come up a lot? Yeah. So we're now a fair drive from Tiverton on the Devon Coast in beer. BWR. It shows you the sheer size of this constituency. It's huge. It feels like a very strange place to talk about politics. It's a full of people on a holiday and day trip. It's a glorious day. The distant courting of seagulls and sea rolling in on the beach. But there'll be a polling station here on the 23rd and people will be out to vote. So Richard, you're the Liberal Democrat candidate in this election. Just tell me, first of all, why you brought us to beer. This is the most idyllic place I've ever done any political reporting. Well, you're absolutely right, John. It's a beautiful place beer and pretty reflective of this beautiful area, this beautiful bar of Devon. This is an enormous county. It's the size of London, the M25, as a county. So it's a shocking lack of social housing, just like there is a sort of a real portative provision in all sorts of areas. I'll give you some other stats. I mean, we have the longest ambulance waiting times in the country and we have the slowest broadband in Tiverton and Honorton in England. Wow. And if people are moving from being Tory voters to vote in Liberal Democrat, at least at this election, what's driving it? Why am I standing here talking to you? Because ordinarily this would be a slam dunk for the Tories. Well, these aren't ordinary times, are they? There are a lot of very unhappy Conservative voters and supporters who feel really disenchanted by the behaviour of Boris Johnson as Prime Minister. I've only been to the Dorset part of this coast. Okay. Brit ports as far as I've got going this coast. If you're wondering whether we're going to talk to the Conservatives, the answer is no. We asked them and they didn't get back to us. He's quite a clever candidate for the Lib Dem Suu Pic for this violation because he's ex-forces and sort of has this, he's obviously got pains to project this sort of stand-up image of integrity and public service. That was what it felt like talking to him. Clean cut. Very clean cutting. And also if you're going to pull an upset by, you know, really getting behind the Tory lines, you don't want a sandalware in Liberal with a beard, do you? You want someone who looks like a Tory but has actually lived there and that's what he is, right? That's all part of it. Make it easy for people. All right, I'm going to try and find out who's done quite well in life, it seems. So I'll just describe the scene here. Richard Ford, the Liberal Democrat candidate, is striding in the direction of a very big white house. I mean, big doesn't quite cover it. I would say that's probably got at least eight or nine bedrooms. You feel good about yourself in a good house like this, don't you? It's a very pretty white. Very quickly we start to see that in an area which is clearly affluent full of big houses with manicured gardens. A lot of people are surprisingly disaffected with Boris Johnson and his government. Sorry to entry, we worked for the Guardian, we're making a podcast and audio program just about the by-election. We're following Richard here around just this afternoon in Seton. You're voting for him? I am, yes. And have you voted Liberal Democrat in the past? Not recently, no. Well, you're voting Conservative in the past. In the past, yes. And what's convinced you to vote for him? I said to him, the first thing was he's not Conservative. But you live in this lovely sort of Le Corbusier modernist house here? Yes. I mean outwardly you've probably done fairly well. People would expect perhaps someone like you to vote Conservative. Perhaps so, yes, but I don't think they've done a very good job. They've been in charge for a number of years now and we're in a bit of a mess and they keep saying we're going to make things better. Well, they've had plenty of time. So I think it's about time something else has begun. Tell me about the mess as you see it. The mess as I see it is the fact we've got enough nurses. We haven't got enough doctors. We haven't got enough teachers. They haven't done any recruitment. They haven't done any forward thinking at all. All they seem to be interested in is the next year. Can we get back into power? In some way with a little bit longer term plans. OK. OK. Anyway, hats off. I wish I hadn't done that. OK, thank you. Thanks again. The Lib Dems are at pains to tell us that they haven't set any of this up. I've got my vote. I've got my vote. Good God, the stuff I've been getting through the door from the other parties for the Ford Britain party. Oh, yeah. Have you seen some of it? But just about every person we meet says they're voting for Richard Ford. And you can safely say you've got my vote. Right. Well, just so you're a former police officer. Yes. And you live here now. Yes. Now, this is just to make this clear. Not like this was a plan. Certainly the people coming to and for along the show, they were all totally random. Completely. You've got a clean sweep. So far, I mean, I will say this is not reflective of a normal. We're showing you a particularly good run of supporters here. And it absolutely is not intended. But I mean, just I think to sort of try to bring some sense of expectation management. Yeah, David's been doing that. Still a challenge and all that. I mean, I'm going to go further possibly than Ed, because I've looked this up and there has not been a by-election swing as great as would be required here for us to defeat the Conservatives. So whatever. The biggest majority ever overturned was Liverpool Wavertree in 1935. And that was just shy of 24,000. We need a swing of greater than 24,000 here in Tiverton and Honiton to defeat the Conservatives. OK. So, yeah, we are not taking anything for granted, as you can well imagine. We are working damned hard for every single vote. You are. Can I ask a question? Does it bother you at all that it feels a bit like you're a protest vote, not a genuine we want the Lib Dems vote? It feels a bit like that. I don't wholly get that sense, because I think what we've done is stood on a very positive prospectus of our own. The things that I'm saying I believe in as a Liberal Democrat are seeming to chime. They are seeming to chime with the people who I talk to. Which are? Well, I mean, for starters, we are suggesting that ambulance waiting times really need addressing now. I mean, I said to you earlier, John, that our ambulance waiting times are the longest in the country. Yeah. Give us another one. I don't know because we're pushed for time. Ambulance waiting times, go on. Yeah. I mean, we're really concerned about sewage in our rivers and we would like to address the dumping of waste in our rivers here with attacks on water companies and on the vast bonuses that are paid to the bosses of water companies. I mean, these sorts of things are a Liberal Democrat policy that people listen to and like without wanting to necessarily protest anything. OK, very good. Thank you. Well, we've ended today, aren't we, on the very particular end of the social spectrum. I mean, these people are very affluent, aren't they, the people who live here? Let's be honest. Yeah. You know, and the next stop is Wakefield, which I'm sure has its wealthy people as well. I don't think it's got anywhere quite as opulent as this. So we're sort of we're covering sort of demographically and economically. We're going to a lot of different places. But I was really struck here in this extremely wealthy part of the world by the fact that either are less Tories around than you'd imagine, which I think that probably is all about a longer term cultural shift. I'm not sure we live in a world or a country anymore. But just because you're really, really wealthy, that makes you a conservative. It doesn't feel like that. That might be moving. But also there are longstanding conservative voters we've met here who just have had enough and want to vote Liberal Democrat. So there that side of the ledger and the other side of the people we met earlier, you want to give Boris Johnson the benefit of the doubt and say everyone's broken the rules and let's move on, etc, etc. It's sort of a verdict as much as anything, isn't it, on the last six months of political history. Yeah. It's a bit like watching the messiest routine you've ever seen in Strictly and suddenly you've got to hold up your cards. And some people are saying two and other people are saying seven. Yeah, I mean, I've never been somewhere where it's been so wealthy and so non-conservative. Everybody. Beautiful. Part 2 of our road trip is to Wakefield, where everyone is expecting that Labour can take back the seat which it lost in 2019 to the Tories. Before we travelled to Wakefield, we asked Labour if we could canvas with their candidates Simon Lightfoot, but they said they couldn't fit us in. So after our surprise visit to their HQ, we settled for a few weeks. Bring back our bus routes. More police to tackle anti-social behaviour. Fight to save King Street's Walking Health Centre. Delivery investment and well paid jobs for Wakefield. Scrap the unfair Tory National Insurance rise. Tackling crime and anti-social behaviour. And his plan for Wakefield, I've just said it really, that's it. Now that we know what's on their leaflet, we're going to find people to ask them about. I hope you can remember where we parked, because I can't. So we're in Wakefield for a bit, that's all. Can I ask you a couple of questions? Do you live here? Yeah, yeah, I live in Oxford. Do you know about the by-election on Thursday? Yeah. Are you going to vote? Yeah. Go on. I don't know who. So I voted Conservative last time and I voted Conservative the time before that. Yeah. I guess a lot of it is surrounding Brexit. So Wakefield, majority voted to leave. Yeah. And then the candidate that we had in Wakefield at the time, Mary Cree. That was the previous Labour campaign. Yeah, she was pushing for a people's vote, which is not really representative of the area that you're in. Right. No, I saw Simon Lightfoot, he also was part of that. So that kind of turns me off. If you're standing for an area and there's been a major kind of referendum, first and foremost, you should be representing the wishes of the people that you're representing more so than your own personal. The Labour Party says it's not going to reverse Brexit. I understand that now. But would you vote Labour this time? Probably won't be voting Labour. So what, your vote Conservative again? I don't know. Did you follow the Conservative MP who was convicted for sex effects? Yeah, we did. Yeah, I understand that. Does that make you feel any different about the Conservative? Not about the party, no, because it's just that individual guy's own problem that, you know, what are you doing out here on a Monday morning? We're going for a baby scan actually. Oh, yeah. That's your first one? It'll be my, going for a 3D scan. So I've only got 10 weeks left. Wow. Excuse me. Sorry to disturb you. We're journalists, we travel around talking to people. What's it about? We asked you two very quick questions. How's Wakefield doing? Crap. Is it? Yeah. Tell me why. Wakefield, it just looks, if anybody doesn't live here and they're coming through it, it just looks rubbish, don't it? It looks really nice on a sunny day. Everything's just closing down. Everything's closing down. It's, no, it's not nice. There's a by-election here on Thursday. Are you going to ask about my voting? I don't know how you feel about it. Normally I'd say, no, I'm not going to bother, but yeah, I'll vote this time because I want Labour to gain seat back, basically. Tell me why. Because I don't think, since Conservatives took the seat, I don't think they've cared. I just, and so, and it's been Labour for lots of years before then, so we'll have Labour back. I think they'll care more, and I'll tell you what I'm voting for. I'm voting for Colin Simon. Yes. That's the Labour candidate. Well, I'm voting for him because I've read his policies. I mean, I can only give him a chance, but I've read his policies, I agree with him, and I'll go for him and give him a chance. One of the policies you like, as an example? Loved. He said he'd put more jobs into Wakefield. He said he's going to do bus services and put them back. Is trying to keep the King Street Medical Centre? Yes. Are you going to vote for him as well? Yeah. And last time in 2019? Who did I vote for? Did you not vote at all? I didn't vote. And for you? You sat on your hands and didn't vote for anybody. I didn't vote for anybody because, but this time I will vote for him. I will vote Labour, yes. Wow. Okay. Right. That's really useful. Thank you so much. Thank you. I'll ask you first, mate. Excuse me. I'm really sorry to interrupt. Can I ask you two really quick questions? Yes. Are you voting in the by-election on Thursday? And have you voted? Yes. Yes. Who's there? Who's there? He's there, Steve. No, no. We're both Conservatives. You've voted Conservative, yes. I know he's a fool. I mean, the man's an educated idiot. But, I mean, he's got us out of Brexit. He's very clever, man. You know, I couldn't have got us out of Brexit and I fancied myself against most things. Is he trying to get us back in? He's reopening it all with Northern Ireland and what have you? I'm not sure it's done yet. I think he's just not bothered about breaking any rules to get us in the right place. I was a rugby player and I broke a few rules to get us in the right place and he's doing the same. I mean, yeah, he shouldn't have done what he's done and he should have walked in them parties and said, stop now, the lot of you, go home. That's what he should have said to him, but he didn't. Now, OK, I don't like that and I don't like him lying. He lies, but he lies to get us in a better position so he can have my vote. Right, brilliant. Thank you so much. Thank you so much. Thank you. Bye. Bye. Thank you. The more people we talk to, the more we begin to get a sense of the basic tension at the heart of this particular by-election. Labour will probably win the seat back, but there's surprisingly little enthusiasm for Keir Starmer and his party. If you want to know why the opinion polls are closer than events partygate chiefly, but also the cost of living crisis and all that might suggest people like that are a big part of the reason why, you know, voters who are more than prepared to give Boris Johnson the benefit of the doubt and think that, all right, he broke the rules and so on, but is that really that bad? And then also they think he's got a record to stand on, right? You start to think, well, maybe, you know, if those people carry on thinking like that, he may very well still be the conservative leader of the next election. Might win, still. Yeah, I can't quite believe we're here and I was really expecting more staunch Labour. Yeah, but Wakefield switched from Labour at Tory in 2019, so you know what I mean? It was a process of long decline very often in places like this, that then sort of climax with that switch from Labour at Tory and that's where you are. And I think people, a lot of people, their feelings about the Conservatives and Boris Johnson are sort of unchanged. Yeah, but those people, I feel like they should be swing voters that are then going to say, yeah, well, Labour, going to go back to Labour now, but it's not that. It's well. That's the other half of the picture, is that? But it's a strong half here. I was not expecting it. Yes, but also what would push those people away from the Tory party? Well, you'd have to have a very energised, clear, convincing Labour message and Labour leadership to be honest. And we haven't got those things. No, and you get the sense that the Conservative message really gets through. They're all saying the same thing. He's got this done. So we're in the Lupset area of Wakefield. This is a 20th century council housing, lots of it. And one of the real sort of hearts or hubs or whatever the word is, the real centres of the community, is the St George's Community Centre, where loads of stuff goes on. You know, bringing the people here together, but also really helping out people who have various needs, all of which is no surprise to say, are sort of made all the more urgent. And there's more need around because of the state everything's in. This is when all those abstract cliches about the cost of living crisis and all that, they become very real, I would imagine here. So we're going to go and see Bernie, who I think is in charge, right? The chief executive of the St George's Community Centre. Is it this way? Where's the main entrance? Are you Bernie? Hi. I'm John. This is John. Nice to meet you. Shall I show you round the side? Yeah, shall I? Take us to the food pantry. OK. Wow, OK. Up to quite recently, he ran a food bank. Yeah. And this is now a pantry, right? Yeah. One of the biggest things that is so important is dignity for people. And there's nothing worse than being given, in my opinion, here's a bag of food. This is what you can eat. Yeah. Because you've fallen a hard time or whatever. Whereas being able to come to a food pantry, you get a bit of dignity. You get to choose what you're going to eat rather than somebody giving you a bag of food. So that's what's changed. Tell me about the levels of need now. Well, prior to the pandemic, the food bank operated one day a week. It's now three days a week. Since January, I've got some stats here for you. Since January, we have provided 439 food parcels. You know, and that's a lot of need, really. And there's a lot of missing need as well. What do you call it? What's missing need? Well, because people won't come because they're so proud. They don't want to come. You talked about the idea of the pantry because of dignity, which of course you can understand. But where did that come from? Well, people don't want to come. They don't want to admit that they need some help. That you wouldn't, would you? You know, I've not got any money to buy my food. What am I going to do? I don't want to go. It's embarrassing, isn't it? I'm down on the luck. I've lost my job or I've had to pay a big bill for something else. You know, yeah. So you do here, but you wouldn't, would you? The point is as well, it's not just food. So you do a lot of work on period poverty here. We do, yeah. We have. Which again is something you think, what's happened here? Well, it's not something that's never been spoken about. That's been around for years. So girls don't go to school because they're on their period, you know, so education's impacted. Health can be impacted and such like. I mean, we have a walk in wardrobe, which I can show you, which is where most of the sanitruer and things go. Amed at young people. So I was talking about that. I'll get another key. Thank you. Hello. Would you be prepared to speak to somebody and then be on the radio and talk about the food? They walk in wardrobe. Bernie takes us down the corridor to the walk in wardrobe to meet Leslie, who lives on the nearby estate and set up this part of the project because of the sheer number of people knocking on her door for help. This is it. This is the walk in wardrobe. So if anybody needs help with a kid's clothes or clothes for them on the same basis, what the pantry works, you can come in. And within reason, you can even take stuff you need a private message over Facebook. It can be referred through the center. So there's racks and racks of what looks like school clothes here to one side. It's all uniforms and then boxes of whatever we've collected that people may need. And then two rails of courts, two big bookshelves of everyday shows and school shows. And then over here, these are all brand names we all know, right? Lillettes and Always and so on, Sampaks and so on. So that's all about what some people call period poverty. Yeah. There's a lot of period poverty with obviously girls, roughly eight to 28 that don't want to ask for it. But no, they can come to our sessions or even not come to the sessions and just say, Leslie, I need help. So then we just have a little wonder down here. Are you going to vote on Thursday? Yeah. Do you know who you're going to vote for? Not a clue yet. Really? What would you vote conservative? I don't know a difference between them all. You've got so much going on that what Boris Johnson and Kirste Armour are getting up to is something that's not really on your radar most of the time. What's the practice? What, the preach? Let's not have an argument about that. But I'll be honest with you, maybe it's a bit surprising that you haven't ruled, I would say, that you haven't ruled out voting conservative. Because they've been in government for 12 years and all the social problems you're picking up and trying to help with, a large part of them are caused by them. It's them who ensured that there was a benefits freeze for three years or that the bedroom taxes......of anything, any of the government, no matter what part of the are, can we believe any of them what they say? Great. Thank you so much. Can you slam the door? Yes, I'll do it. Thank you. Thank you. My chat with Leslie really brought home to me that even people who are faced with raw poverty every day are sometimes almost indifferent to the very politicians who are making the decisions that cause those problems. Something I wanted to speak to Bernie about afterwards. The fact that there's a social emergency here, isn't there? Let's be honest, right? And a large part of that social emergency has been caused by the decisions taken by people in power. It's not like it happened by accident. And then along comes, there's a matter of sort of happenstance really, along comes this by-election. Which people like me are encouraged to think it's really important and we get very excited and worked up about. And so do some people here. But I've spoken to a lot of people today who have direct experience of that social emergency or feel very strongly about it or are aware, very aware that it's happening. And yet they don't see Thursday as being anything necessarily connected with that. You're right. I mean, there's been 12 years of Tory government, which I don't think has helped in any way, shape or form. But I think there is an apathy towards voting and politics in general. I think what's caused it is a disconnect between both parties. They're not connected at the local community level. Do you think one sign of that was Wakefield doing what up to that point had almost seemed unthinkable and returning a Conservative MP? I think that was more linked to Brexit and leaving Europe. I think it'll definitely go back Labour this time, but I don't think it'll be a huge margin. Are you going to vote Labour? Most likely, yes. Do you think that it will be very tight for Labour in this election? I do think it will be very tight. I mean, there's 15 candidates on the ballot paper. Some may say that's choice, but I do think that there will probably be quite a lot of protest votes. So in other words, the idea that Labour's going to romp it, you don't buy. I'm not convinced that they will. I think they will get in, but I don't think it will be. Do you know what I think the big... I think that's a far-gone conclusion. I think there's a massive sort of... one of the... Certainly on the non-tory bit of politics, there's a huge question which hasn't been answered. It's partly a historical question, and a place like this really brings it into sharp focus, was the way that the Labour Party connected with working-class people traditionally was via trade unions and things like coal mines and steelworks. Now, if the coal mines and steelworks disappear and they take the trade unions with them, you've then got a gap between the Labour Party and the people. Now, what could fill that gap and connect progressive politics with people on the ground? The answer is probably organisations like this, but we don't know how to make that happen. And more to the point, not all, but some Labour Party politicians don't seem to understand that. Yeah, I think you're absolutely right. This is where the people are, you know. So it's fab. It's great. We love it. We love it here. Well, Kirst, I've been in Wakefield a lot lately. Has he paid you a visit? No. Well, there you go. Case closed, as he would say. Brilliant. Whatever happens at these two violations will be seen as significant. This is quite complicated, but if I work this through, I think this is right. If the Conservative Party lose both Wakefield and Tiviton and Honnet, and I think that compounds Boris Johnson's difficulties. He's in a very bad place. You know, he's still stuck in no-confidence land. Right? So that's that one. If, and I think they probably will lose Wakefield, but if they hang on in Tiviton and Honnet, and I think that'll be talked about as Johnson being the great escape artist once again, if by some miracle they hang on in Wakefield even more so. And so everyone, political journalists I'm talking about, and politicians are very excited about these two violations, because they will mark a moment. There seems something quite striking to me about the fact that the one set of people who don't seem very worked up about these violations are the people who are actually going to be voting in them, or not voting in them. Politics is still stuck. It's not me in the moment. I tell you who is me in the moment, though, and that's what really gives me cause to feel hopeful and optimistic and get out of bed in the morning. It's people like Bernie and the amazing people we met at that community centre, community organisation. Because what they're doing is profoundly political, and it seems much more impressive and real and relevant to the moment than most of what I hear from Westminster. But they still didn't know if they were strongly voting Labour. Leslie didn't know. And even Bernie wasn't sure. That's exactly what the Labour Party or the political left, the wider political left, is going to have to sort out. Because believe you me, if you're not the natural option for people doing amazing work in their communities like those women, then you're not in the right place. This episode was produced by Natalie Katena. The music was by Axel Kakutier and the executive producers of Maz Ebzahaj and Nicole Jackson. We'll be back next Thursday. This is The Guardian.