 The Guardian. A shock defeat in the Chesham and Amisham by-election gives Boris Johnson something to think about, as we mark five years since the Brexit referendum. I'm Heather Stewart, political editor of The Guardian, and this is Politics Weekly. Yes, it was a certainly disappointing result, and I'll thank Peter Fleet for outstanding local candidate. But there were particular circumstances there, and we are getting on with delivering our agenda for the whole country. Ed Davies, Liberal Democrat, stunned Westminster last week by overturning a 16,000 Tory majority in the Buckinghamshire seat of Chesham and Amisham, are the Conservatives' southern heartlands at risk. And almost two years after Boris Johnson claimed to have a plan to fix social care, we still haven't seen it, and the Prime Minister and the Chancellor seem to have fallen out over how it should be paid for. What's going on? And meanwhile in the Labour Party, Keir Starmer shakes up his team. Plus... Four, three, two, one. So there it is. The UK has left the European Union. Has the Brexit referendum, which happened five years ago today, if you can believe it, changed British politics forever? That's all in this week's Politics Weekly. But first, for a round-up of the latest news out of Westminster, there's quite a lot, I'm joined by Guardian columnist Gabby Hensliffe. Gabby, it's lovely to have you on. First of all, let's start with this latest news about the privatisation of Channel 4. I mean, I feel like this is a story that's been written quite a lot over the years. But it'd be a big change to the television landscape, wouldn't it? Yeah, it's not, as you say, a total shock. Government's been talking about this for a while. But it's a pretty seismic change in television. And Channel 4 is a unique set-up now. It's not publicly funded, but it is publicly owned, and it was established with a sort of public service ethos to cater for audiences that aren't served by other channels at a time when there barely were any other channels. And I suppose the question is, would a new commercial owner be more of a ratings chaser? Would it still want to do an hour-long, in-depth evening news show, say, which is expensive to produce? Or would we just get more Love Island spin-offs? Not, I have to say, that I have anything against Love Island at all. But it is a big potential pot of money from a sell-off at a time when the government is really, really short of ways to raise money for all the expensive projects it has in mind. And talking of difficult financial conversations, let's move on to this battle over spending and social care, Gabby. I mean, this has been something Boris Johnson promised us, of course, when he first arrived in Downing Strait in 2019. We still haven't seen this plan. And it's been reported this week a bit of a clash between him and Rishi Sunak about how to go ahead. Yeah, I mean, this is something that the governments of all stripes have been sort of inconclusively wrestling with for a long time because it's incredibly expensive and all the solutions are incredibly popular. And apart from anything else, it has always been a tricky problem. But what we're seeing here is the downside of cakism, which is the idea that you can have your cake and eat it. You can make wildly popular promises today, like you have to sell your house, and not worry too much about how you're going to deliver them tomorrow because tomorrow will somehow never come. But actually, reality catches on with you in the end. And I think what we're seeing now is governments struggling to square the circle of what it's promised and what it can actually deliver. And to some extent, Rishi Sunak seems to be making himself into, you know, the guy who has to tell Boris Johnson that you can't have your cake and eat it, doesn't he? I mean, that's always the chancellor's role to some extent, but you feel a little bit of tension between them. And perhaps Rishi Sunak is a slightly different kind of politician. And the chancellor's job, as you say, is always the person who says no. But in this case, he seems to be the reality check. A lot of MPs increasingly see him as sort of the grown up in the room or certainly the person who stands for a more familiar, Tory approach to public spending, which is to do with prudence and keeping borrowing down and not spending money that you don't have. You know, and that endears him to a part of the Tory backbench party. And that, in a way, doesn't help the relationship because number 10 doesn't 100 percent trust Rishi Sunak's motives. They think he has his eye on the top job. You know, we've had just this week, we've had a very flattering profile of him in the papers, which is all about how he starts his day with a peloton class and listens to Brittany and eats yogurt and blueberries for breakfast or whatever it is. You know, there's a certain sense of him being positioned for something, which almost certainly doesn't help the relationship. And you're starting to see tensions in that relationship for the first time. And what does it tell us about Johnson? I mean, the politics of this issue, this social care issue, are always incredibly difficult, aren't they? But he doesn't seem to be particularly great at grappling with difficult decisions or with confrontations, Johnson. Does he? You sort of think about that. Dominic Cummings' description of him chairing cabinet meetings and then sort of, you know, as soon as anything difficult comes up, says, let's take this offline and then sort of does a thumbs up and pegs it out of the room. It's these difficult politics of priorities type decisions he doesn't seem to be terribly good at. He doesn't like confrontation, doesn't like confrontation on a personal level, I don't think. And that's always been true. He tends to prefer to tell people what they want to hear and kind of change it behind their backs when they're out of the room. But as Prime Minister, there comes a point where you have to choose a side. You can't just agree with everyone around you and run away. You're also dealing at this point with the legacy as well of, you know, a difficult relationship with Matt Hancock, the health secretary. He's also the sort of the third sort of wheel of this conversation. We're only a few days from the revelation that the Prime Minister thinks the health secretary is hopeless and Hancock is still in a position where every time he goes out to do an interview, someone says, are you hopeless? Can you work for someone who thinks you're hopeless? You know, these are not sort of favorable conditions in which to have a difficult conversation, put it that way. No, absolutely. And a lot of these conversations will be taking place, won't they, with at least half an eye to the next general election, which, you know, could be three years off, but maybe quite a bit less than that. Yes, because any changes to social care would take a fair well to work their way through the system and, you know, are likely to be coming in. Suppose we have an earlier election than expected. Suppose it's 2023, you know, this stuff could be coming in just as an election is in the offering. There are also implications here in some ways for the levelling up agenda because anything that any social care policy that's basically hinged on allowing people to pass down property to their children, well, that's going to disproportionately benefit. People who've got big, expensive houses to hand down to their children. That's primarily the southeastern London. It's less appealing, perhaps in the north. Yeah, absolutely. And Gabby, talking of general elections, Keir Starmer's team had a bit of a shake up this week. It's not over. It seems to be part of the sort of rolling reverberations of that that Hartley Paul by-election loss. But we've seen Jenny Chapman, who is his political director, very strong supporter of his moving aside, other job changes to follow. We're told what's going on there, do you think? This is something Starmer's friends and his enemies have been talking about for a while, the sense that his back office operation puts a lot of noses out of joint in the parliamentary Labour Party. The MPs aren't happy. They feel shut out of things. And while they might put up with that, if Starmer had a 10-point lead over the Tories and everything was going brilliantly, they might say, well, you obviously know what you're doing. We'll leave you to it. When things go badly, people start to get very restive indeed. And after he lost Hartley Paul, and as he Starmer reshuffled his shadow cabinet, he was massively criticized for doing that because it looked like he was shunting the blame onto other people rather than taking the responsibility himself. So it's looking as if Labour may well lose the badly-expressed by-election coming up. It does look as if this time he's trying to get a reshuffle of his backroom operation in first. We know there was going to be some changes because we know Deborah Matinson, the pollster, is coming in. But I think the risk this time is that the changes are big enough to unsettle people and to make you enemies, but not quite big enough to make a visible difference to voters. So the people think, ah, you know, clearly something is just a clearfoot here. I think the problem is also that MPs start to ask, you know, is the king really this badly advised, or could the problem possibly be the king himself? Is he blaming other people for what are actually his failings? Yeah, indeed. And there's MPs and how happy they are. But, you know, how much difference does it make, do you think, to how well a leader performs, how well the party performs? You know, that that sort of backroom operation works well. I mean, there are a bit sort of Westminster bubbles to these stories, obviously, aren't there? Most of the people, you know, the director of communications and all the many of these sort of job changes that we'll be talking about, people, you know, who aren't close watchers of it, won't know these people or what they do. But how much does it matter that that works effectively, that team around the leader, do you think? These are the jobs that you never notice when they're done well. But when things don't go well, you start to see the grit in the machine, so to speak. And I think without that operation around you that's running smoothly and harmoniously and pulling everything together so you're all running in the same direction, you know, the wheels start to come off fairly quickly. The question for many people be, though, is this purely a sort of operational thing, you know, that you've got a few square pegs in round holes and you need to put people in different jobs and then everything will be better? Or is the problem more fundamental? Is it to do with Labour's policy offering or lack of it? Is to do with Stalmer himself? Is it to do with something that you can't change by moving everyone round a job? Talking about by-elections, you mentioned Batley and Spen there, which feels like a headache for Labour. And of course we saw Hartley pull. There was a very interesting result last Thursday, wasn't there, in Chesham and Amisham, sort of true blue, we thought Tory territory. And Boris Johnson got a bit of a shock. He certainly did. I think what we're seeing is the downside of forging a new electoral coalition that always have done very successfully. And the upside, obviously, it gives you a landslide majority, you know, it gives you untraveled power. But the downside is you've brought together two quite different sets of voters with different priorities and sometimes they're going to be in conflict. And you can't assume that the old base has nowhere else to go. So I think the result in Chesham and Amisham has the overturning of a really solid Tory majority. That's sent a shiver down the spine of other southern Tories. And I suspect, as a result, the planning reforms, which are clearly an issue in Chesham and Amisham, the Lib Dems made great hay with this idea that the Tories are going to build all over the countryside. You know, I think those are in for a very rocky ride indeed. And Boris Johnson told his cabinet earlier this week in response to some of this criticism, I think, that levelling up is about the whole country. But presumably you get to a point where that just becomes meaningless, don't you? Either you're helping some left behind areas or you're helping everyone, in which case it's not really levelling up, is it? I don't think that's what, to put it this way, I don't think that's what voters in the Red Wall seats understood by levelling up. What they understood it to mean was, you know, your areas haven't had a fair crack of the whip and in future they're going to. And I think there's always been this tension in that the Tories levelling up meant, you know, obviously we're going to do things for these places and we're going to pour money into these places, but that no one in the south is going to have to lose as a result. And I think there's very interesting passage in Deborah Matinson's book actually about the Red Wall and the focus group she conducted up there, which she found a very different feeling among voters. They actively wanted, felt the south needed to lose out in order for the north to gain, there needs to be a quid pro quo. And that's what I think government is struggling with to some extent now. Meanwhile, David's Liberal Democrats, you know, they'd struggled to cut through during the pandemic, they've got a bit of a spring in their step, haven't they? Having been missing, presumed dead for the last two elections. It's not just actually a Lib Dem revival, I think it's a return in a big way of tactical voting. The Labour vote in Chesham and Amishim absolutely just vaporised. And that's, you know, some people have turned that into a weapon to attack Kistama with. But if you talk to local activists, they'll tell you it's big. People could see the Libs were best placed to get a Tory MP out and they did what they thought they needed to do to make that happen. And I think if there'd been a Southern seat where Labour was the obvious challenger, was second placed, then I suspect a lot of Liberal Democrat voters would have returned the favour. I mean, the impact of not having had a Progressive Party in power for so long, I think, is that you're seeing the re-emergence of a committed anti-Tory vote that is willing to grit its teeth and do whatever it takes to get rid of a Tory MP. And the Labour Party should actually probably take heart from that. It's the return of something that helped to deliver Labour a landslide in 1997. In some seats, you know, Labour needs the Lib Dems to be strong to thrive. And does that mean Kistama should be talking to the Lib Dems, do you think? Or is this something that sort of happens organically, as you say, voters themselves have a look and they see which is the strongest local candidate? Do you know, do you need sort of pacts and deals or sort of Progressive Alliance type approach? I think in a by-election, voters are brilliant at going, okay, you know, what should I do here to make an upset happen? It's very easy if there's only one place that a small party like the Lib Dems is fighting at the time. You know, it's very easy to pour all their energies into it. It's much, much harder to get people to do that in a general election. But I think we're going to see for the next few months a raging argument about whether there should be a sort of formal official conversation between the parties, or whether actually that just puts voters off. You know, they don't like necessarily the idea that something's being stitched up by the parties doing deals behind closed doors. And also there's a quite patronizing assumption often that Lib Dems are really just Labour voters in disguise, you know, that they're perfectly happy to throw their way in behind the Labour Party where it helps. Well, then, oh, you know, some are Lib Dems because they're really, really Lib Dems. And, you know, some Lib Dems, if they had to have a second choice, it would be the Tories. So it's a lot more complicated than just saying all the other parties will get together and agree on an anti-Tory platform and storm to victory. Gabby Hinsliffe, thanks ever so much. Thanks for joining us. Thank you. After the break, we go way, way back to 2016 to a day most in UK politics will find hard to forget. We'll be right back. Welcome back to Politics Weekly. I'm Heather Stewart. Now, cast your mind back to 2016. Does any of this ring a bell? The British people have spoken and the answer is we're out. The dawn is breaking. I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain. Brexit means Brexit. So the no's have it, the no's have it. Unlock. So I am today announcing that I will resign. In the UK, there's just one day to go to what's being called the most important election in a generation. It's a conservative win. I will not lead the party in any future general election campaign. The most important thing to say tonight is that this is not an end, but a beginning. British voters went to the polls on this day five years ago, leading to a country divided not only along party lines, but by a simple question, leave or remain. Did Brexit change the political landscape in the UK forever? I reflected on these past five torrid years with Laura Parker, Labour activist. She was Momentum's national coordinator until 2019. And previously worked as private secretary to Jeremy Corbyn. James Starkey, head of networks for the Vote Leave campaign and former government adviser and Arne and Menon, director of the UK and a changing Europe think tank and professor of European politics and foreign affairs at King's College London. So welcome, everyone. I am going to have to start by asking you where you were when the result of the referendum came in. So I know where I was. I was on the 4 a.m. shift and I was sort of whizzing into the Guardian offices and attention. And my taxi driver was absolutely delighted at the result. And that was which sort of was just about to be becoming pretty clear by that point. James, presumably you must have been at Vote Leave HQ, were you? Yes, I was at Vote Leave. The press team took a bit of the afternoon off. But yeah, I was in the Vote Leave offices when all the results were coming through. And were you you know, how do you expect it? You know, were you at that point? Did you think you'd done it? So it's a funny one. I did kind of two roles. I did regional press and business engagement. One of the business guys who kind of said to me on the day, you know, look, I keep seeing what's in the press and we're not going to win. But I can't find anyone who's actually voting for remain. And I had a dinner with Lee Kane and Lizzie Loudoun. And we kind of did a straw poll. I'd leave it up to them in future to say what their predictions were. Mine was 52, 48 to Vote Leave. I hope you put money on it. I did not put any money on it. No, I didn't. Unfortunately, I didn't have the courage of my convictions, unfortunately. And Laura, where were you? What do you remember about that night? Oh, gosh, I try not to remember it too often. I was in Labour Party HQ with a relatively small group of people from Corbyn's. I was working for Jeremy at the time. I just started working three weeks before the referendum. So I was with my relatively newish colleagues. And yet I had also before I had a sort of probably the polar opposite experience. I lived in Vauxhall. So as a campaigner, I'd campaigned for remain in a very, very remain voting part of the country. But I'd obviously watched the news. And I guess before the results started coming in, I was hoping that remain had done it, thinking probably that remain had done it, probably just done it. But I remember that we had the on the hour updates of numbers. And I think it was somewhere between about three 30 and four in the morning. It became pretty clear. And then there was a bit of mad scramble as people decided what to do. It became pretty clear. And then there was a bit of mad scramble as people decided what Jeremy would say, which you might argue he should have planned beforehand. And it was interesting, Laura, because you're obviously very ardent remainer and went on to campaign very strongly for people's vote and so on. And there was a real feeling among some people in Labour on that night. I remember in the early hours of that morning that Jeremy Corbyn hadn't really articulated how they felt. You know, there were obviously lots of strong remainers in Labour who felt quite grief stricken. You know, Jeremy sort of went out there, didn't he, and kind of said, you know, we have to enact this. Let's let's move on. I mean, was there much talk about how he should respond? There was discussion about it. I mean, I think I was torn between sort of professional head, which said, well, you know, Jeremy, the Democrat is going to obviously honor the result. He everyone had said they would before the vote. So, you know, there was a bit of a can't win if you do can't win if you don't. But, you know, I understood the instinct to want to trigger Article 50. It was obviously a mistake on behalf of everybody, government and opposition, to think that that was just a simple act without having really a plan. Personally, of course, I was really I mean, I probably still am pretty upset. But I don't think that that really kicked in for many of us until some significant time later. So we'll talk more about the Labor's response and the sort of collective nervous breakdown or whatever it was that happened on on that side. But James, in the vote leave camp, how much thinking had there been about what kind of Brexit we were going to end up with? And the assumption was that David Cameron would hang around, right? I mean, I think it's fairly well covered. The vote leave campaign, I don't think it's unfair to say, obviously, you know, Dom Ledet is a kind of his decisions, but saw itself very much as that as a campaign for that referendum in the sense, you know, all of our contracts, me included, ended on the day of the referendum. So I think in terms of like what the Brexit was off to it, that was felt to be kind of up to the politicians within the context of seeing how the campaign went. And, Arne, did you realize at that point that it was going to be an incredibly complex process? I mean, I think we I can remember when we were writing about the Remain campaign, there was some story we wrote that came from the sort of stronger inside that said, I think that might have been a speech David Cameron made or whatever. But that said, you know, if it's Brexit, you're looking at sort of 10 years of negotiations with the EU and with other trading nations, which at the time seemed kind of mad. But, you know, now seems like a conservative estimate. I mean, was it always obvious that it was going to be a really complex and difficult process? Even that first morning, about nine, 10 o'clock after Cameron had gone, just reflecting, do you want to what an utter failure of political leadership we'd witnessed from both parties? I mean, Cameron hadn't allowed the civil service to do any preparations. So there was absolutely no plan. And I just thought when I heard Corbyn say let's trigger Article 50 immediately, it was just barking mad. I mean, we just because the one thing that was obvious from Article 50 was that one of the aces we had up our sleeve was to delay triggering. As soon as you triggered it, anyone who read Article 50 and admittedly, that wasn't many people that morning, but we had it was quite clear that once that clock starts a ticking, we were going to be in a weaker situation. And the combination of Corbyn saying that and Cameron walking away left me slightly gobsmacked out. One of the questions, and you can never know the answer to this, it's one of those things that's great in hindsight is, did it need to happen in the exact way it did happen? We had that election, which was perhaps unnecessary in 2017 and caused more, not less political chaos. Did Cameron need to go when he went, etc.? So, well, some of the events that happened after perhaps made that process, that three, four years, it really took us in the end to get to even where we are now. And perhaps more difficult than it could have been in other circumstances. But on the sort of EU side of it, I think there were two things that were absolutely crucial. The first is because a remainder became prime minister, she devoted her first year to proving her Brexit credentials to the ERG. She didn't feel secure enough to take them on in any way, shape or form. And I think it might have been very different had someone from Vote Leave won that election. And the second thing I think was absolutely fundamental was because the Tory leadership campaign didn't go the distance, because essentially Theresa May ended up being elected unopposed. She didn't have to spell out a vision of Brexit, which then got the endorsement of the membership and of her MPs. And again, I think if she'd been forced to do that, so if she had become prime minister, having spelled out something of her vision of the future of the EU, I suspect things might have panned out rather differently. And Laura, we sort of went, didn't we, from thinking that Theresa May was a remainer who might perhaps go for a sort of soft kind of Brexit and perhaps even a Brexit that Labour might be able to support. There were certainly noises of that kind from Jeremy Corbyn. You know, to a campaign on the Remain side that felt, no, soft Brexit wasn't going to happen and they had to go for a referendum. I mean, a lot changed in that period. And I wonder how much you think that was to do with what was going on in Labour and how much of it was to do with Theresa May and how she handled things. Well, the more that Theresa May was forced to capitulate to the sort of more extreme voices on her side, the more Remain was emboldened. But I wonder whether they might have played out differently if the parliamentary Labour Party had felt that one of theirs, you know, a more sort of middle of the road leader, they might have been forgiven more easily than Jeremy was. And do you think that's right? Do you think there was a sort of jaundiced sense that Jeremy Corbyn was a sort of closet Brexit-er? Did that sort of feed this idea that actually you had to keep pushing him and ultimately you had to push him towards accepting a referendum, which was not something he would ever have done instinctively, I don't think. A second referendum, I should say. No, no, I think there's definitely an element of truth to that. And I think also the fact of Corbyn became really important when we got to the tail end of 2019 and those parliamentary debates, because firstly, it, you know, the threat of Corbyn made more conservative MPs remain loyal than would have been the case, I think, had the Labour leader been someone they felt a little bit safer about, as it were. I think the threat of Corbyn held the Conservative Party together to a far greater extent than would have been the case otherwise. I mean, of course, one of the ironies of the whole thing is by the time we got to the end of the process, Theresa May had in fact negotiated a Brexit deal that many in the Labour Party could have supported. James, you mentioned this kind of realignment that's gone on that Dominic Cummings has talked about as well on the right. You know, Boris Johnson's Tories are in quite a different place, aren't they? I mean, as you say, Theresa May started to do some of it, but you've got this kind of marrying of sort of left wing economics, let's spend a lot of money on the NHS with kind of quite right wing positions on things like crime, immigration, you know, kind of culture or war issues. I mean, was that something Vote Leave were conscious of, that they were sort of creating a new political direction? From my own perspective, Vote Leave, or working in the Tory parties over the last few years, I think it's that this idea of the centre ground, where is the centre ground, what is it and so on, and how we see it through the parties that we've all grown up with. The Tory party, to me, is still slightly wrestling with where it is. And we've seen some of that post the Cheshire and Amish and By-election. I'm not an expert on it, but I'm not sure the Labour Party has quite consoled itself to where its base is and what that exactly looks like. And these are things that I think have been changing over years, but if Vote Leave did anything, it brought to the forefront of our minds because of such a dramatic decision. And we know it polarised the country. And it's led to these leadership battles and these two elections in that period, where the debates have been placed before party members and before the public to make decisions. And I think that's where and why you've seen the alignment in my own view. Arnold, is that right? What does the data tell us about that realignment and what's happened over that period? I think that's absolutely right. And I mean, here I've got to stop and just recommend the book Brexit Land by Rob Ford and Maria Sobolevska, because what they say, and I think they're absolutely right, is what the referendum did was it gave solid identities and labels and tribes to two groups that had been there in British politics for decades, but had never had those things before. It really activated that values divide. And James is absolutely right. The sweet spot in British politics was for a party that was sort of interventionist on the economy and social conservative on values. And that, strangely enough, is exactly where Boris Johnson seems to sit at the moment. Laura, do you think Labour has really come to terms with the fact that the Conservatives have occupied this sort of slightly different political space in the wake, or they've used Brexit to occupy this slightly different political space? I think the party is struggling to find its feet. And in many ways, has a not dissimilar challenge to the Tories? Does it bend over backwards to talk to a certain demographic in certain parts of the country at the expense of some of its other base? We're nervous about saying anything really about Brexit. And I think that may be to our detriment, because there is still a great deal more to be said. Laura Gordon-Brown said the other day, didn't he, that he would campaign for the UK to rejoin the EU? I mean, is that the right thing to do? Can you see yourself campaigning for rejoining at some future point? A future future point, but not now. I don't think the politics of now is a rejoin campaign. And Keir has been very careful not to send that signal. The politics of now, for me, is holding the Conservative government to account with the various promises it made. Eventually, yes, I would hope. But then, what would we be rejoining and on what basis? And finally to all of you, we've had this incredibly polarised period, haven't we, where you've got family members who weren't able to talk to each other about Brexit anymore because it became this incredibly divisive issue. And I just wonder whether you think we can move on from that or we have moved on from that. You know, has the pandemic sort of put things in proportion a bit? Are we able to sort of bring, you know, end that division a little bit, end that polarisation and bring people back together a bit? Arnold, what do you think? I don't think it's easy to end the polarisation because it's not just about Brexit. It's a broader values divide, isn't it? So this, you know, the debate might take the form of a row over statues or a row over gay rights or whatever it might be. I think it'll be very, very hard to put that genie back in the bottle. What I would say, though, is it is perfectly plausible as we come out of lockdown if the economic situation deteriorates, whether it's via inflation or whether it's via unemployment, that we might in six months time find ourselves in a political environment that feels a lot more like the old political environments, where actually the argument is about economics and not about values. And remember, whilst Labour is very vulnerable on values for the reasons Laura has pointed out, that it's a very, very divided tribe, the Tories are equally vulnerable on economics because by creating a values coalition, you've created a coalition that doesn't really have a homogenous position when it comes to the key issues of the size of the state, levels of state intervention, levels of taxes. And we're seeing hints of that this week in the debates over social care, Northern Powerhouse and so on. James, do you think that's right? Is it tricky for the Tories if we sort of move away from this, this values divide? Yeah, I think Anna's bang on. I mean, I would say just to separate one thing, I think on the issue of Brexit, we're moving past it. And I think a sign of that was actually the election. The Get Brexit Done appealed to a lot of kind of soft remainers, if you like. We knew there was that third in the middle who could go either way and some of them that wouldn't remain, which was just a feeling of like, I don't want to deal with this anymore. But I think, as Anna alluded to, the economy and how that goes over the next year or two will be interesting. And particularly in the Tory party, one MP remarked to me the other day that the problem with a lot of the new MPs is they see themselves campaigners and they're not the legislators. And that it's all too easy to say, well, we need 100 million here and there. And I think the pandemic, rather than Brexit, has a lot to do with that kind of attitude. And there definitely is different views in the Tory party, which, if we had a stress of a kind of poor economic situation, could well play out. Laura, do you think we could move beyond politics of the sort of, it was a really emotionally charged, wasn't it, that period after the referendum? Do you think something like politics, as usual, could return a little bit less polarised perhaps? Well, I think the polarisation, as Anna suggested, remains. Because it's not, you know, Brexit didn't divide us. Brexit showed the divides. At a personal level, we'll have to get beyond it. We have to get beyond it, in my view, by doing what we can to ameliorate the worst aspects of Brexit, which I cannot, still not, and will not support, which doesn't mean I'm not reconciled to it existing. But it sort of depends who you talk to. I mean, you know, many of us, many millions of us, have had our lives quite fundamentally changed by this. So I think the pandemic may have put it in some perspective, but we mustn't overlook the very real problems that we still need to solve. Thank you all ever so much, Anna Menon, Laura Parker and James Starkey. Thanks very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And that's all from us this week. Make sure to listen to Friday's episode of Politics Weekly Extra, as Jonathan Friedland speaks to former Congressman Tom Perriello about why Catholic bishops in the US are choosing to defy Pope Francis in order to punish Joe Biden. But for now, I want to thank our guests Gabby Hinsliffe, Anna Menon, Laura Parker and James Starkey. The producer is Yulien Goffin and I'm Heather Stewart. Please look after yourselves and thanks for listening. Thank you.