 This is The Guardian. The Conservative Leadership Contest is dragging to a close and it's becoming pretty clear who the odds-on winner is. I work hard, I deliver, I'm determined and I don't take no for an answer. That's how Liz Trust describes herself, but not everyone has such a flattering view of the woman who, barring disaster, is about to become Prime Minister very shortly. Here's Rishi Sunak, now very much the underdog in this contest, on his opponent's plans for tackling the cost of living. That all sounds a bit too good to be true and I think most people listening will think, you know, most things when they do sound too good to be true, they probably are. After days of unusually explicit blue-on-blue attacks this week, we look at the still unanswered questions surrounding Liz Trust's thinking. I'm Gabby Hinsliffe, sitting in for John Harris and you're listening to Politics Weekly UK for The Guardian. Joining me today are Salma Shah, partner at Portland Communications and a former special advisor to Sajid Javid and Sam Friedman, a senior fellow with the Institute for Government, but before that special advisor to Michael Gove in the Department of Education, where Liz Trust, of course, began her government career. Hello, both. Hello. Hello. Now, I don't know what you had to have been up to on your summer holidays, but the bar for kicking back and relaxing has been set pretty high by Sanna Marin, the Finnish Prime Minister. She took and passed a drug test after video surfaced of her partying in her spare time with friends. Boris Johnson, meanwhile, is nearly back from his second holiday of the summer, even though as of September 5th, he can presumably take all the holiday time he likes. Salma, everyone's entitled to a life outside work, but how much of a life exactly? Should parties be off-limits for politicians? Is dancing all right? To be honest, I think, you know, it is quite difficult to sort of tread that line, isn't it? Because people who are going to criticise you are going to criticise you. In the case of the Finnish Prime Minister, I was probably a bit like, oh, gosh, she's Prime Minister and she's off having a dance, but that's largely because I'm jealous because she's 33 and I don't think has children. And the idea of sort of going out for a night out dancing is very far from where I am at the moment. So maybe there's sort of some latent resentment there. But, you know, she parties in a way that I don't. She also does probably loads of chin-ups in the way that I don't. So she probably does ten a day and I can't do that either. But I'm not going to complain about it. So I think she's well within her limit to have a nice time. I think the question about our Prime Minister is slightly different because he is about to be out of office. We are facing these massive problems in the country. And, you know, you'd think that he'd want to be at the helm and behind his desk for as long as he can, given that he's not going to be there much longer. I'm going to skip over those images of Boris in his swimming trunks. I think we probably all can't forget at this point. But, Sam, are we being a bit hair-shirt about this? I mean, or even a bit unrealistic, if Boris Johnson was in number 10, do we seriously imagine he'd be sort of nosed to the grindstone achieving great things in the remaining five minutes of his time as Prime Minister? But he hasn't done anything in the last three years. So I don't see why you'd expect him to do much in the next few months. Usually, I'm very happy with politicians taking holidays. There's always a fuss about it. And I think, well, they've got to have a break. They're going to be much more useful if they're refreshed. This is a very different situation. He's only here this month. And to go away twice feels quite like a sort of a pointed sulk complaining about the fact he was thrown out rather than sort of getting on with it and contrasts very strongly with Theresa May, who in her last few months actually achieved probably more than she'd done in the previous year once she was free of the Brexit route. So, yeah, I think kind of the way he's leaving the job kind of sums up how he did it. She was building a legacy and he's building a sontan, I suppose. Anyway, nobody in politics. This autumn is going to have an awful lot of free time. We're talking today about how Liz Truss will handle the cost of living crisis and also about the results of the first proper GCSE exams since Covid. But let's start with the issue that's really been at the forefront of everyone's minds. This Friday off, Jem will announce her high the energy price cap covering fuel bills for people not already on fixed deals is going to go this October, with some predicting it could rise to around 3,500 and potentially a lot more to come next spring. On some estimates, half of British households could be in fuel poverty by January as a result. Liz Truss started this campaign saying her priority was cutting taxes, which she argued would help people with the cost of living, while Rishi Sunak said his priority was help now, tax cuts much later. Truss even told the Financial Times that she wanted to help people in a conservative way, looking to tax cuts and not handouts. But as it's become clearer that tax cuts aren't much used to people who don't actually pay those taxes, including many pensioners, as well as the very poorest, her team has backtracked a bit saying she'd been misinterpreted. She wasn't ruling out handouts. But it's still very unclear what she actually means by that. Here's what she had to say on the hustings in Birmingham this week. We have to be bold. And I have set out a bold agenda of not just lowering taxes and helping people who are struggling. And I understand there are problems with food bills, with fuel bills, but also with the cost of living. We also need to make sure we grow the economy and we avoid talking ourselves into a recession. Salma, she's going to have to U-turn and offer some kind of direct cash out with bills when she gets into number 10, isn't she, surely? I think it's becoming increasingly unavoidable that that is the action that she's going to have to take. And that is largely because this is not just sort of, you know, cost of living climbing up and wages not sort of keeping up with it. This is a massive economic shock. And so she is going to have to address it because we are really going to start seeing the effects of this come September and October. She is going to have to go in and work out what the numbers are and what she's offering and who she's offering it to. Because, you know, as you said in your intro, there is no point in offering tax cuts to those who are, who don't pay the tax already. But also you've got to be really careful about the fact that you're not going to help people who actually don't need that help with a kind of, with a blanket sort of payoff. And, you know, in the way that some people have suggested that you've got a cut VAT on fuel bills, you know, you really got to target it because none of us know how any of this is going to be funded at this point in time. So she does have to go in and have a look at the numbers as well in the Treasury and see how it's going to be affordable. Sam, do you expect her to offer some kind of direct cash payment? And if she does, does that leave any room left for the tax cuts? She's built her campaign room. I mean, yes, it's inevitable that she's going to have to offer something. It is not feasible to go into the winter without offering substantial support. And it isn't just the poorest. It isn't just the most vulnerable. This is a large, large chunk. The big majority of the population are going to need some support with the bills that are coming. And I think it's going to have to be really quite substantial, which she's got really two options. You can either do a kind of cash handout to people of the kind of issue SINAC did earlier in the year, but have a bigger scale, or she can do what Labour and Liberal Democrats have argued, which is to sort of try and cap bills and subsidise it through the energy providers. There aren't really any other options. And there's no way to be kind of clever about this and say, this household doesn't need it. This household does. We just don't have the mechanisms at this speed to do that. So she's going to have to do something very substantial. If she also wants to do her tax cuts, which she's given every indication she does want to do, we're talking about massive increases in borrowing. You know, we're looking at over the next 18 months, we're looking at 130, 140 billion pounds, the kind of figures that are being banded around, because the energy prices aren't going to be dropping any time soon. And that blows out of the water any kind of fiscal targets, any kind of belief that she's going to be a prime minister who's gone in a different direction to sort of Boris and Rishi SINAC, who also had to massively increase borrowing because of Covid. And normally in those circumstances, if you had a prime minister putting together that kind of emergency package, you'd expect the Office of Budget Responsibility to be jumping up and down, the independent body which acts as a kind of reality check on economic policy. And saying, you know, you don't have the headroom to do this. But she said that she won't require an assessment from the OBR before she puts her package out necessarily. Does that worry either of you? I mean, there's an element there of almost trying to ignore reality. And I don't want to be told anything inconvenient. I think that one of the things that is always quite telling about any candidate or indeed sort of any gobbly special adviser, as we've had over the past sort of few years, is that people who start criticising independent agencies and people who start, you know, sort of criticising officials, faceless officials, there's a real danger attached to that because what they're essentially saying is that, oh, this can be done without all that due process and the regulation. And, you know, you're just you're being killjoyed and you're being difficult. We need to do something. Well, actually, those checks and balances are really, really important. And we are in an emergency situation. And yes, you have to show that there is an impetus behind what you want to do when you want to drive something forward quickly. But it cannot be at the expense of organisations that are there, essentially, as you just said, to offer that reality check and to be transparent and give everybody the same set of numbers so that you can draw your own conclusions from it. So that that is worrying because it is it's it's sort of it's a nod to that we've had enough of experts type line, which, you know, actually, I don't think has aged all that well, especially experts that don't agree with me. Sam, you wrote a brilliant sub-stack piece about about Liz Trust when she was at DFE and what it was like arguing with her when she set her heart on something, some slightly mad idea, rather. Does the way she's behaving now seem consistent to you with the with the Liz Trust union? Yes, I think so. You know, as I said, in that piece, she's a smart person. She's a canny resilient. She wouldn't have got to where she is if she wasn't. But her sort of flaw is that she's sort of always looking for the idiosyncratic, the bold, the different, rather than accepting the sort of expert advice. And sometimes that's the right thing to do, the expert advice, the consensus can be wrong. But it but often it isn't and sort of constantly trying to push against that and argue against that will take you down a lot of blind alleys. And I think we've seen that a bit over the last month, the sort of refusal to engage with what's inevitably coming down the line feels a bit like that sort of stubbornness again coming through. And everyone can see she's going to have to do something, but she just won't won't talk about it and won't engage with it. It's a bit Nelson with a telescope to the wrong eye, isn't it? Kind of I see no ships, so there are no ships. How does she react if she's told she can't do something? Did she listen to advice? Can you make an argument to her that she will will eventually accept? Yes, I think so. You know, she will listen to advice, but I think she's one of those ministers and she's certainly not the only minister I work with who's like this, where you have the debate with them. You get them to understand a certain issue. They'll accept it. And then the next day you're back having exactly the same argument again. We just talked about this yesterday. Tamal, why do you think she's clinging so hard to tax cuts? I mean, they were, you know, her big dividing line with Rishi. If she dumped them, is that essentially a retreat too far? She would effectively be agreeing that he was right. So I think it's not a question of that he was right. I think, you know, this is a very fast moving situation and the news gets more and more dire, you know, every single day as it goes past. But, you know, the trend is only going in one way. What I imagine is important is that she wants to set a tonal difference, which is about growth, which, you know, other people are not talking about at the moment and that are root out of, you know, some of these problems is about investing in growth now and not trying to stymie the economy with certain tax cuts. But the big issue that she's actually going to have, which obviously impacts all of this, is that the last spending review was based on an inflationary increase of 3%. And we're now talking about 18%. So the moment that she gets in, there are going to be really hard choices for all of her ministers around what happens in real terms to the budgets that have already been set. So cuts are coming. We're sort of getting distracted almost by this idea of kind of like the tonal approach that she's taking with, you know, going for growth, which is a message that she is obviously very focused on. But the reality of actually the nitty gritty and the technicalities that she's going to face. So it might be that she ends up doing the Rishi plan and having tax cuts later if she can foster loads of growth out of nowhere. But I think it's hard for her to let that go because it is very distinct from what her opponent is saying. Coming back briefly to the specific question, a few wheels and even the energy retailers now raising the alarm about the implications of where the bill's going and the prospect of millions not being able to pay. Here's what the chief executive of Octopus, Greg Jackson, told BBC Radio 4's Today programme earlier this week. The big thing here is we need more help for customers from the government. The reality is customers are being asked to pay the price of gas, which is weaponised by Putin. And they shouldn't be expected to do that alone. Let's put it in perspective. The UK's energy bill is going from maybe 15 billion in a normal year to 75 billion pounds this year. That's the equivalent of maybe nine pence or more on the basic rate of income tax. No government would announce that. And in the same way, no government should let this go to customers. In the meanwhile, after weeks of being criticised for not having anything to say about the cost of living, Kia Starmer and Rachel Reeves have unveiled their plan to freeze the energy price cap, which looks a little bit closer to what some of the power companies are asking for. It's a big plan with a price tag of about 60 billion. It's bold. It's easy to understand. It seems to be popular. So has this been a good week for Labour, Sam? Yeah, I mean, I haven't been a massive fan of Kia Starmer's Labour over the past few years. I think they've been over cautious and missed quite a few opportunities. And maybe they were a little bit late on this one as well. But I think they've actually come up with a very clever plan at this stage, because it's very easy to understand. It's clear offer. It's very hard for the government to replicate. And they've already been very critical of it, which makes it even harder for them to replicate. Whatever the government are going to offer, Labour will be able to advance an alternative. And the fact that they were a little bit dodgy in their costumes doesn't seem to have caused them any problems. They put themselves in a good place now to counteract almost anything that trust can do and get in ahead of her as well. It looks to me, Sam, like they're trying to repeat in a way what they did with the windfall tracks, trying to stake out popular ground and then try and force the Tories onto it, or at least try and make them spend a wearying amount of time explaining why they're not going to do it. Do you think that that pressure is factoring into the trust campaign at all? Do you think she's got an eye on what they're doing or at the moment is she just really, really focused on on the membership contest? Well, she has to have an eye on what they're doing, because ultimately, you know, as is now predicted, she's going to be the next prime minister and she is going to face Kia Starmer, you know, at the next election. Naturally, ideologically, Labour are on safer ground because if it means more borrowing, if it means sort of thinking about the finances differently, they don't have to subscribe to conservative fiscal rules for Liz trust to rival what Rachel Reeves and Kia Starmer are presenting is a complete sort of departure from her conservative way of being. So I think it's going to be really interesting. I don't think she needs to worry about that in the immediate because what she's trying to do is get hold of conservative voters who are looking for that optimistic pro growth message, which is why I think she's doing so well. But, you know, if Rishi was smart, he would make more of a play on this, which is, you know, down the line, you are going to have to sort of think about what this actually means for borrowing and against the tax cuts that you've already promised. Yeah, it's interesting, a cabinet minister who'd worked with her said to me that the thing that she was probably most at risk from was the markets just being spooked by a trust government and thinking this is, you know, this is wayward and all over the place and over borrowing. And that's the point at which, you know, a reality check sets in that isn't necessarily being provided by your opponents. But let's just pause there for a minute. Up next, we're going to talk about GCSE and A-level results and what they might tell us about the UK's generation of covid kids and their longer term future. Welcome back on Thursday morning, hundreds of thousands of teenagers will eagerly be or perhaps not so eagerly in some cases be opening their GCSE results. Last week's A-level results showed grades down on the last two years when grades were assessed by teachers in the absence of kids being able to sit formal exams. And there was some evidence of students in the north where covid cases were higher and education, perhaps potentially more disrupted, falling a bit further behind. Sam, what are you expecting GCSE to show us? Well, unusually, we know exactly what they're going to show us. We're going to get results that are halfway between those in 2019 before covid and 2021 last year, where, as you say, results were set by teachers. And we know that because the government and off-call the exams regulator have told us that's where they're going to try and get the exam results to come out this year. What they're trying to do is get us back over the course of two years to that 2019 number. So before this sort of covid era inflation was built into the grades. So we are on a glide path, I think they called it, and back back to that. So we know what results are going to be. We were able to know what A-level results were going to be last week before they were announced. Obviously, we don't know what they're going to be for any individual student or school, but at a national level, we we know what the picture is going to be, which means it won't actually tell us very much about real performance and real world attainment because the results were essentially fixed a year ago. A-level results are often seen as really high stakes because university places depend on them. But half the country doesn't go to university. GCSEs are really critical for hundreds of thousands of students taking them. What are the implications of potentially the past mark, for example, around the key GCSEs like maths and English slipping back from where they've been over the last couple of years? I mean, that's a really high stakes issue for a different group of kids. Yes, I mean, GCSEs are less high stakes for individual students, but they do still matter. And they also matter even for those going to university because because we use predicted grades as a way of doing university admissions in this country very unusually. GCSEs are the only actual grades students have going into university as well. So it does really matter. GCSEs will be much less affected than A-levels by what's going on by this covid readjustment because they didn't rise so much, partly because they are less high stakes. They didn't rise so much. They didn't inflate as much. So we're not going to see as big of a drop. And I think the system will manage it fairly well, to be honest. I'm not anticipating any massive sort of outrage or huge problems as a result. And actually for the kids who are on the borderline of getting a good pass, that actually didn't change very much at all during covid. It was only the top grades that really inflated. A lot of relief for lots of parents, if you're right. How worried are you both about the broader picture of the damage covid has done to this generation of kids? Not just necessary A-level and GCSE students, but younger children too, all the way up from early years and the number of toddlers you missed out on nursery time to primary school children who start at school. Was very disrupted. How long was it realistically going to take to catch up? I was until recently a school governor of a local primary school. And one of the things that we had looked at in terms of early years, you know, central London school, lots of kids don't have outdoor space. They're sort of trapped in small flats and things like that. And so up to the age of five, I don't think we've seen yet what emotional impact that has had on a lot of children and the way that they are socialised, you know, the the limitations of what their parents can do. And that's all parents. This isn't kind of, you know, trying to target anyone in particular. I don't think I would have coped particularly well with under fives during covid. So I think we are still trying to ascertain what the impact has been, especially for those young children. And I and I do worry, particularly around some of the rules that governed outdoor play and all that kind of thing. When we were a shut up, you know, you can only go out once or whatever. And the interaction with other children could have a really severe impact on the way that they then go and behave in classrooms and the way that they think about rules and order and being able to focus and concentrate. So I don't think we're really at a point yet where we can understand what it's done to those children. Sam, how much do we know already about the damage done by school closures or the damage done by learning loss during lockdown? And how optimistic are you about the, shall we say, quite limited catch up programs that have been put in place? So we have some good early evidence, I think, both from the National Reference Test, which is an annual test that is low stakes and is used to see whether there's actual real change in the system year on year for secondary students. And then from the end of primary tests as well. And what both of those show, interestingly, is that maths has got worse, but English hasn't. So we've seen a real drop off in in maths performance. And I think that's very likely because parents found it a lot easier to help with English than they did to help with maths. Certainly during our house. Yep. And true in our house as well. And maths is probably also more sensitive to losing the sequence as well. So so I think maths is the area I'm most concerned about. And I think the government's done very little to help schools. Schools are struggling for all sorts of reasons facing the same inflation of crashes everywhere else is. So so there's not there's nothing additional that's happening for those young people really beyond a bit of extra tutoring for some of them. So I'm not sure we're ever going to recover that that maths loss in particular for the cohorts that have been affected, which is which is really a shame and other countries did do a lot more than we did to try and to try and mitigate that. But I am separately from the attainment learning loss. I am worried about the social implications and we have seen a huge surge in the number of mental health cases for for adolescents in particular. Terrifying for a lot of parents of teenagers. Education used to be absolutely key to what was called the level to what was known as a levelling up agenda, giving kids from poor backgrounds the skills to get on in life supposedly. I want to take you back from it to Boris Johnson. It feels like it's a long time ago, this, but it was only in July 2021. No one believes. I don't believe you don't believe there's any basic difference in the potential of babies born across this country. Everybody knows that talent and energy and enthusiasm and flair are evenly spread across the UK. I don't think either of the candidates in this current contest would disagree with anything he was saying there. But but are you surprised that education and levelling up haven't featured more on the hustings that had that both candidates haven't been pushed more in detail as to where they would be on this one summer? I think it's interesting because how how much are they wanting to even talk about levelling up because it's such it's so associated with Boris Johnson. And I think that at some point they're going to come up with their own marketing rapper and whatever it's going to be. So, you know, levelling up used to be the Northern Powerhouse, which turned into the Midlands Engine, which was probably called something else under new labour. And essentially, let's be honest, it's just a marketing rapper to put round lots of policies that have probably existed in in in lots of different administrations. Ultimately, the thing that is missing is both candidates actually talking seriously about the skills agenda and whether that is school level, whether that's in relation to covid catch up or whether that's in relation to the fact that we need to sort of have a better skills profile nationally for the kind of industry and the kind of sectors that we want to attract to this country. It's it's been pretty pretty woeful. I think the problem is that you can't talk about sort of wanting to supercharge and turbocharge the economy as they have done previously, or talk about whatever version of levelling up they're going to have without truly addressing the fact that they're not really releasing human potential. And worse than that, you know, Liz Truss's recorded comments that were leaked about the fact that British workers aren't grafted. I mean, that just sort of underlines how preposterous the skills agenda is in terms of the way both of these candidates think about it, because how do you have a productive economy unless you're upskilling people? So I feel very disappointed by it. Sam, it wouldn't be a Tory leadership contest if someone hadn't suggested bringing back grammar schools. I mean, that's literally on the bingo card every time. Do you find it frustrating that that's sort of been the level of debate about education? Yeah, I mean, this trust thing, she wants more grammar schools. It's it's desperate, desperate stuff. She has no way to actually create any more grammar. There's no money. And the law doesn't allow it. So you'd have to pass a new law and good luck to her getting that through the Lords before the next election. It shows a real lack of ideas. It's not even popular anymore. I say it feels like a real throwback. It feels like, oh, we're back in the sort of 1990s, John Major. Yeah. I mean, it might be popular with Tory members just about. But certainly anyone over the age of anyone under the age of 65, what what are you talking about? This isn't related to their experience of education or their understanding of what needs to to improve at all. So I very much expect it won't happen at all anyway. But it yeah, it certainly indicates the the poverty of the debate. And also the kind of it strikes me the sort of abstraction from real life. I mean, it's not it's not a conversation that anybody I know is having at the school gate. You know, it's not it's not what people with kids in school are currently worried about. And that's before we go to say I want to come back to something that your old boss, Michael Gove, want a set of trust in her in her piece for the Times. He said her economic plans were taking a holiday from reality for someone as terminally polite as Michael is. That's fairly withering. Is that fair? Is there a broader part of that? Is she effectively the candidate along with reality or the candidate who's not really engaging with reality? I mean, yes, at the moment, she's not engaging with reality very clearly. She's going to have an ugly meeting with it in a couple of weeks where she's going to have to engage with it. And we'll see how how well she deals with it and how well that goes. But I think, you know, Michael Gove's point is quite important because it tells us that there will be a quite a substantial group of experienced former ministers on the backbenches who are very unconvinced by Liz Truss and will be not openly hostile straight away, but will certainly be waiting for her to slip and won't have any compunction about pointing out when she does. She does not have a united enthusiastic party behind her, which makes all of these major challenges that we've talked about even harder to deal with. All holidays and to some extent with her with coming back down to earth and a queue at the baggage carousel and a load of unpacking. Do you think when it comes to that stage for for Liz Truss sound, can she make the switch between the sort of personality she's presented on the hustling and the kind of personality she's going to have to present if she's going to appeal to a very different electorate? She's capable of doing that pivot. The answer is I don't know because there's a challenge for her and it's sort of the Theresa May challenge, which is sitting atop a government, you know, with civil servants who will just do what you say, making yourself feel powerful that way, is not the same, obviously, as going out to the public and whether she can be popular and, you know, give that sort of sense that she's on people's side. I'm not sure that that's there. And I also think that, as Sam said, she's going to have a huge problem sort of keeping her parliamentarians on track. What kind of leader will she be in order to create that broad consensus and that sort of big tent approach? I don't think that's going to happen. And so I wonder if that if that Theresa May type problem is going to reappear, which is it's my way or the highway. And when she goes out to an election campaign, is she just going to be really annoyed with anybody that criticises or challenges and just tries to bulldoze through? And I really worry that her leadership is going to have that complexion. I mean, people call her Continuity Boris, but she doesn't have that sort of jovial, campaigning side to her. So I do worry that it's going to be a little bit of a repeat of Theresa. Great. On that note, the police are really... You can see why, given how sort of ugly the political reality facing whoever wins this time is. You can see why almost someone might want to take a holiday from it. But ignoring reality doesn't make it go away. I suppose there's a problem. Can't help wondering whether that's where Liz Truss, for all her determination, is potentially going to come unstuck. But anyway, thank you very much, both of you. Thank you for joining me today and thank you for all your insights. Thanks, Gaby. Thank you. Thank you for listening. And I hope you enjoyed today's episode. This episode was produced by Frankie Toby, music by Axel Kakutye, the executive producers are Maz Eddahaj and Nicole Jackson. And John Harris will be back next week with an episode of Politics Weekly UK coming from Birmingham. This is The Guardian.