 Just a heads up that pretty early on in today's podcast you'll hear some bad language, not from me of course, but it might be a good idea to skip about a minute if there are kids in the room. Dominic Cummings paints a picture of complete chaos in Downing Street at the start of the pandemic and throws just about everyone under the bus along the way. I'm Heather Stewart, political editor of The Guardian and this is Politics Weekly. Former chief adviser to the Prime Minister turned scorned critic Dominic Cummings gave evidence to a marathon Commons committee on Wednesday. He's still going as we record this, but he's already spectacularly attacked the government's handling of the pandemic. When the public needed us most the government failed and I'd like to say to all the families of those who died, and necessarily how sorry I am for the mistakes that were made and for my own mistakes at that. A quick summary, until mid-March last year the government believed the only way to manage the virus was to allow it to spread until herd immunity was achieved, with chickenpox parties even suggested. Boris Johnson completely failed to grasp the gravity of the situation, calling Covid a scare story and at one point even suggesting Chris Whitty could inject him with the virus live on TV to show how safe it was. And the health secretary Matt Hancock should have been fired for allegedly lying and general incompetence. It's hard to see how heads won't roll after this, although we've said that before about government scandal, so what will be the ramifications of today? As Johnson grapples with Cummings, Pretty Patel is busy battling with immigration reform. Later on, I chat to Daniel Trilling and Lord David Blunkett about the historical issues that continue to plague the home office today. Plus, weeks after appointing a new levelling up advisor, after critics argued the government's plan to tackle regional inequality lacked clarity, Peter Walker and Will Jennings try and figure out what Boris Johnson's goals actually are. That's all in this week's Politics Weekly. But first, as we record, Dominic Cummings is still presenting evidence to the select committee, but we have quite a bit to get through. So as Westminster reels from the dramatic revelations, I wanted to chat to Sonia Soder, the chief leader writer for The Observer and Guardian columnist, to get her take on everything. And just a quick warning, we were so excited about today's events that I failed to record my end of the conversation with Sonia, so the sound might not be quite as good as usual. Apologies for that. Sonia, as always, it's lovely to have you on. It's a bit of an extraordinary day, isn't it, in Westminster? Yeah, it has been. We've all been waiting for this testimony from Dominic Cummings in the House of Commons for quite some time. And, you know, I think there was a lot of people saying, well, we sort of know the broad parameters of what's happening, so how much is his account really going to add? But it has been pretty explosive, it's fair to say. And while it is just a testimony of one man, and, you know, obviously, if it was a proper inquiry, you'd be hearing from a much broader range of voices, some of the things that we've learned have just been, there's been some quite extraordinary allegations in there. And me and others were realising at this point, the system is basically delaying announcing all of these things because there's not a proper plan in place. I was very struck by this sense of, a sort of terrifying sense really, of complete chaos in the early days, or not even the very early days, it was sort of early to mid-March last year, which was obviously a crucial phase when decisions were being made. And there was just this sense of complete chaos as one particular day he described, wasn't there, where? So we had this sort of completely insane situation in which part of the building was saying, are we going to bomb Iraq? Part of the building was arguing about whether or not we're going to do quarantine or not do quarantine. The Prime Minister has his girlfriend going crackers about something completely trivial. You know, Boris Johnson was trying to think about whether to engage in some Middle East and bombing raid, but also Carrie Simmons was a bit cross about a story someone had written about her dog, you know, there were various other things going on. And it just this sense of kind of utter confusion. It sounds like total chaos. And I actually think it's quite frightening hearing one person's account of what was going on behind the scenes. Because in some ways, we sort of knew that the government got it fairly catastrophically wrong in early March, that there was a change in strategy, that that, you know, undoubtedly did cost lies and that government didn't learn from its mistakes. So you can kind of sort of put your imagination to good use and sort of imagine what was going on. But there's nothing quite like hearing an account from behind the scenes. And even though we've had quite a lot of reporting about what different people say, nothing has really matched this account from Cummings. So I don't know about anyone else, but as I've been listening to Dominic Cummings, I have sort of, it kind of brings back how you were feeling back at that time. And that sort of panic that everyone felt about kind of, well, does the government really know what it's doing here? And how bad is it going to be? So I think it does add a human element to the tale that even though we know the broad brushstrokes of what happened, hearing just how chaotic it was behind the scenes is quite scary, I think. Yeah, I think that's right. And, you know, you imagine perhaps when you sort of look at number 10 from outside, you imagine there's this sort of presiding figure, which is the prime minister who's making all the decisions. And that's where the power lies. And he's the guy that pulls the levers kind of thing. But the way that Cummings talked about Johnson and his role at various points was pretty extraordinary, wasn't it? In February, the prime minister regarded this as just a scare story. He regarded, he described it as the new swine flu. Yeah, I mean, I think in many ways to people who've watched Boris Johnson's premiership, some of the stuff that Dominic Cummings says won't be a great surprise in terms of the broad nature of his character. So we've known for a long time, he's incredibly indecisive, he's chaotic, he can't make difficult decisions, he's swayed too much by the sort of last person that he's spoken to. But really hearing the detail of some of the conversations between Cummings and Johnson, not just some of the awful things that he's alleged to have said, things like, you know, chaos and the prime minister saying, well, you know, chaos isn't that bad, because at least people look to me for direction, the sort of gist of what he was saying. I mean, it's just, it's really quite jaw dropping, to be honest, to have all that colour put around what we know, essentially, Boris Johnson's character to be, just kind of like a terrible leader for these times. And there are, as I was saying, there were some decisions where it feels like there was a group thinking that the scientific advice was in the wrong place, or there wasn't enough preparation. But there are also, it seems, decisions where Boris Johnson really, or certainly in the Cummings version of events where Boris Johnson was quite critical, for example, border policy, he made very clear, didn't he, that it was Boris Johnson who didn't want to, for example, stop flights coming from China and so on. Fundamentally, there was no proper border policy, because the prime minister never wanted a proper border policy. One of the things I find so extraordinary, Heather, listening to this testimony is, Boris Johnson was apparently saying last summer, like, oh, the first lockdown was such a mistake. How? How could you look at what happened and not see that the issue was that we didn't lock down sooner, rather than lockdown was a mistake and we'd have been better off doing it, not doing it altogether. It's just very hard to see how any kind of rational, sentient person would kind of look at what happened and come to that conclusion. Yeah, and I think that's the decisions get harder and harder to explain as you go on, don't they, with this early phase thing. They do. You've talked about where the advice was conflicting and there was lots of other things going on and it wasn't clear how serious it was in mid-March, that's clearly a mistake. But as you say, by the time you get to September, when you feel like you've played this all once already, it's more damning that even by then Boris Johnson was kind of holding out, isn't it? Absolutely. And I think when you look at the cost of government, bad government decisions, there's no question that bad decisions were made in March, but I think that's the point that the decisions were made in March. But to some extent, it was a bad mistake, as Dominic Cummings said, a huge error that resulted in the loss of life. But to repeat those errors, which is absolutely what happened, the Prime Minister was resisting scientific pressure and advice to go for a circuit breaker lockdown early. He delayed till November. He then relaxed restrictions in early December when cases were going up really, because he wanted to give people Christmas and he said the lockdown was only going to be a month. He really did not learn the lessons from March, from what he got wrong in March, from what Cummings and the scientific advisors got wrong in March. And that is unforgivable. It's absolutely unforgivable. Once, okay, but twice? And there were some decisions, it seemed to me the decisions were divided into sort of different groups because there were clearly in that early phase, you know, Dominic Cummings talked about a sort of group thing, didn't he? There was clearly a collective sense, and this embraced the scientists as well and the experts, as well as the officials. There was a collective sense, wasn't there, that, you know, you couldn't really stop this virus. We couldn't possibly do a Taiwan style or a Chinese style sort of lockdown. You know, that wasn't a sort of British thing to do. You wouldn't, you know, freedom-loving people like the Brits wouldn't take any notice if you told them to stay at home. So we only had one option. And that one option was herd immunity, was to kind of let it travel through the population as, you know, hopefully control it a bit and wait until enough of us were immune to it. I mean, the government now says that wasn't the plan, but Cummings set out a pretty good case that that was really what people thought was the only option at that point. I'm completely baffled as to why number 10 is trying to deny that because we, that was the official plan. You can see it in the COVID documents that I've brought along. So I think what's interesting about it is, you know, Cummings' big thing has always been group thing is really, think is really bad. And you've got to have people who are willing to sort of question assumptions and subject assumptions to kind of different thinking. And that's what he's always said that his mission to do was in government. But what comes out of his testimony today, actually, and there was kind of quite an interesting level of contrition there about what he's got wrong to some extent, was that he said it took him way too long to challenge that group thing. And that that was part of government decision making that ended up costing people's lives and that he's really sorry for that. So I do think that was interesting, because it's basically Cummings admitting even though he sort of lambast people for going along with group think that actually he did it himself. And Sonia, he's absolutely kind of coruscant. I mean, there were various people he seemed determined to take down and other people that he barely mentioned who it sort of felt he might perhaps be keen to protect. But poor Matt Hancock really came in for it, didn't he? I think that the Secretary of State for Health should have been fired for at least 1520 things, including lying to everybody in multiple occasions in meeting after meeting in the cabinet room and publicly. Yes, I mean, the charges leveled against Matt Hancock are really dreadful. He's been accused of lying at cabinet committees. Cummings says that the cabinet secretary actually said that he didn't, you know, the system isn't sort of designed to cope with the minister like Hancock, who lies, which is a really extraordinary claim. And it's something that the prime minister kind of denied in Prime Minister's question. So someone's lying here. And, you know, this idea that Matt Hancock interfered with the operation of test and trace to try and get it to meet, you know, this this target that he set very, very publicly to the detriment of the scheme and again, in a way that that would have had an impact on people's health. These are incredibly serious allegations that Hancock's going to answer got to answer. And the one thing I would the one sort of slight note of caution I would sound is that Cummings himself is not known to be a reliable witness. And actually, you know, just as we were sort of coming on air to record this, we were hearing a very different account of Cummings's trip to Barnard Castle Castle that he gave at the time. We know that Cummings himself does is not always completely upfront, honest and transparent about what he tells us. So I do think that there's an element here of, you know, him coming into this knowing who he wants to take down. And, you know, there were some people who've been, you know, actually sort of received relatively sort of glowing accounts, people like Rishi Sunak, for example, and I do think we need to think about, well, are there ulterior motivations here? And it would be wrong to say, well, we're hearing what Cummings says and just to take take that as read because Cummings himself is not a reliable witness. And he also had the sort of temerity in a way to say, there's a very profound question about the nature of our political system. That means that we got at the last election a choice between Jeremy Corbyn and Boris Johnson. You know, it was kind of he said it was crackers that he himself was in government in such a senior position. And it was crackers that Boris Johnson was prime minister and that, you know, it was crazy that he had a political system that presented with the voters in December 2019 with the choice of Jeremy Corbyn and Boris Johnson, which is a kind of extraordinary thing to say, isn't it? Given that, you know, he was very closely involved in bringing Boris Johnson to the electorate and bringing him into Downing Street. Well, completely. And, you know, he was the one who was he was a sort of mastermind of the 29 Boris Johnson 2019 election campaign. I'm sure if you asked him, he would say, well, you know, Boris Johnson was a bit of a useful idiot for me to do what I really wanted to do, which was get Brexit through. But I mean, goodness, what it what does that say about him as a person and the lack of respect that he has for the electorate? Downing Street have been trying very hard to detract from this hearing in advance. And, you know, we'll obviously get a bit more of that today. And the prime minister has already had the chance to deny some of the charges that Dominic Cummings has put. But does it does it do Boris Johnson much harm, Sonya, do you think this? I mean, as you say, he's an unreliable witness. The public probably think of him as an unreliable witness. But, you know, do these sort of things cut through to voters that the idea of Boris Johnson saying that over 80 only over 80 year olds are dying from covid, you know, getting the policy wrong in March, getting it wrong in September and so on. So all this stuff is kind of stuff that we already know and that the public seemed to have moved on from, you know, the poll show, the public thought that the government handled the pandemic badly last year, but it was extraordinary circumstances, vaccine rollouts going well. This sort of relitigates it all because there's nothing like giving something a human story and humanizing the story of what happened to kind of, you know, put it back in people's consciousnesses. So I haven't quite made up my mind. I know this is a bit of a cop out. I haven't quite made up my mind how much I think this is going to affect public perceptions. Yeah. I suspect that what will happen is it won't do the government too much harm right now. But if something goes wrong in the pandemic handling in the next few weeks or months, this stuff is going to come back and it will really harm the government then. You know, we will hope that it doesn't obviously. But also, you know, in a couple of years when we're revisiting this through an inquiry, again, this is stuff that might kind of really start to hurt Boris Johnson then. So I don't think he escapes it entirely. Yeah, I think that's probably right. Sonia, how do Labour play this from now? Keir Starmer obviously leapt on various things that Dominic Cummings had said and challenged the Prime Minister about them at Prime Minister's questions. There were questions about Labour's approach during the local election campaign, wasn't there, that they'd focus too much on sort of backward looking issues, perhaps on sleeves and so on. But does Labour need to keep hammering home the role of Boris Johnson in some of this terrible decision making, do you think? I think so. Look, I think the public maybe aren't sort of in a place where they want to hear loads about the mistakes that the government has made right now in the here and now. And that's always been a problem for Labour, I think, since the sort of last general election. It's found itself in this place where actually, like, as an opposition, your job is to scrutinise what government's doing wrong and you hope that that gets you ahead with the public as well. And we sort of seen a bit of a divergence there because both with Brexit, I mean, no one really the public aren't really that interested in Brexit at the moment. And then on the pandemic, I think there is a danger for Labour in the sense that if you go too hard in government, it looks like you're making political hay out of a national emergency in a national crisis. But I do think that it's just so important that that the government is held to account for what's gone wrong, even if it doesn't get them far politically at the moment, because it is their job as an opposition. And I do think that there will come a time where actually it does help land their political message as well. Yeah. And just lastly, Sonia, I wonder what you think is next for Dominic Cummings. He's this very sort of strange figure, isn't he? He doesn't have any loyalty to anybody. He's quite happy to sort of drag through the mud, the name of anyone he's ever worked for. And yet, in some ways, as you say, some kind of startling insight. So you expecting him to pop up at some point in the future? Is he going to be in I don't know, was she still next number 10, for example? I would be really shocked if that happened. Because I just think after I mean, goodness, if you're a politician, no matter how amazing or brilliant you thought he was, and I do think it is it is very over ranked his capabilities. But watching that evidence session today, you would just you just wouldn't touch him with a bargepole, would you? There's absolutely no way I think any politician can trust him now going forward. So I do think his his sort of career in politics, you know, is probably is probably over. I think you're probably right. Sonia Soder, thanks very much. Thanks, Heather. After the break, we look at the failures of the home office, and Peter Walker learns more about the politics of levelling up. We'll be right back. Welcome back to Politics Weekly, I'm Heather Stewart. Now on Monday, Home Secretary Priti Patel officially launched a US-style digital visa system that she claimed would help the government to count the number of people entering and leaving the UK accurately for the first time. For anyone coming to the UK who doesn't have a visa or immigration status, they will soon need an electronic travel authorization. This is just the latest announcement in Patel's plans to enact a complete overhaul of the UK's asylum and immigration system, with critics calling aspects of the plans inhumane. She's not the first Home Secretary to grapple with the immigration system, the Windrush scandal being a prime example, and she won't be the last. But is there something inherently broken about the Home Office? According to journalist Daniel Trilling, and the many current and former workers at the Home Office he spoke to recently, yes there is. Daniel detailed the various issues in a long read for The Guardian published a couple of weeks ago. Earlier this week I spoke to him and Lord David Blunkett, who served as Home Secretary in the early 2000s under Tony Blair. Daniel, perhaps you could start us off by telling us how you went about writing this this really lovely long read that you've written about the Home Office, a somewhat depressing long read about the Home Office. You spoke to lots of people didn't you from sort of top to bottom really, and both inside the Home Office and also those those who sort of suffered at its hands as it were. Yes, well the the piece took me about six months in total to report and write up, but really because I've reported on various aspects of immigration and border policy for about 10 years, it stemmed from something that I'd encountered quite a lot where people who work with the Home Office, lawyers for example, or campaigners or ordinary people who get caught up in immigration policy, would often have this question why do they behave this way, you know sort of seemingly illogical behaviour that comes out of the Home Office. And that was one of the the main questions that I set out to answer with with the reporting for the piece. And David when you spoke to Daniel did it did it make sense to you that you know this is a department that's had a very sort of troubled period and that is you know not fit for purpose was the phrase wasn't it that John Reed used but does that ring true to you? Yeah I don't think we should just dub the whole department. I mean there are things about the Home Office historically that saw itself as a almost hovering above problems. People look back and think we had a liberal period and then we had a difficult period. We didn't. The attitudes after the Second World War within the Home Office and beyond were horrendous as they were in 1968. Those two Labour governments didn't distinguish themselves by great liberal policies on immigration and borders but it is inherent in it that you've got a problem that nobody knows how to resolve easily. That the tensions between securing confidence in the system and your borders and a much more open liberal approach in a global context just don't match and trying to get those to work is then completely bedeviled by an administrative system that's never worked. Dealing with people is very different. I'm not talking about processing someone's claim. I'm talking about the basic administration of not losing the passports, of not losing the documentation, of not loving it as we have at the moment 109,000 people who are in limbo because their cases are not being processed. All of that was there when I was there and it's still there now. And Daniel is it part of the problem that it's almost impossible, it's a sort of sprawling department and it's almost too big. I mean there's that tension as David said between trying to be as liberal as the economy needs us to be but as tough as perhaps the public wants us to be on immigration. Is it also a department that's trying to do too much? Well I think historically that was the feeling but obviously after 2006 the home office was split into two and the idea being very much to tackle that problem and some of its functions were given over to the newly created Ministry of Justice and then the bits that remained in the home office were supposed to be much more lean and efficient and focused on security. So since 2006, 2007 the home office has been primarily responsible for policing, counter-terrorism and immigration control. But I think it goes to show that the fact that that didn't solve all of these problems shows that it's not simply about size. I think it's the combination for me of seeing immigration primarily as a security concern. I know David was saying that the sort of challenge politicians have is to balance an open liberal immigration policy with making sure the system is secure and so on but I think it's the security aspects that have led over time with a feeling that this also isn't really anything that people in government want to invest a lot of money in and to create a system that actually works properly and treats people humanely. And David how easy is it for a home secretary to come in and sort of change the culture as it were? How much of a sort of culture is there about the place and how sort of long-standing and deep-seated is that do you think? I don't think there's a receptiveness to change. I mean we're being pejorative here because obviously there are loads of good people struggling in the home office. Disadvantage to some extent from 2006 was at least when I was there there was a very broad sway the policy and people could change from one route to another so you had the opportunity of promotion within the department without being stuck in the immigration as it was then in the immigration nationality directory. The problem I experienced was doubly difficult because I came in with quite some radical ideas about citizenship and identity and trying to leaven the system and all of that got shot to pieces on the 11th of September literally in 2001 when the element of security suddenly became really critical and people movements across the world accelerated on the back of the intervention in Afghanistan subsequently in Iraq. So we had a triple situation on our hands which as Daniel says involved security as well. I think looking back we did the best we could but the best we could wasn't good enough. Daniel you talk about the fear that envelops the home office that you know officials and so on feel what's that? Why is that the case? The fear most of all was kind of driven by this sense that either you would be portrayed as having lost control of immigration and I think there the pressure from the right-wing press was particularly acute both for politicians and civil servants but also the fear of being perceived to just be not competent and as we said before this phrase not fit for purpose was first aired by John Reed in 2006 but people who've worked in the department much more recently than that would tell me that that idea that you didn't want to be seen as not fit for purpose would kind of drive how you behaved and I think that mentality is quite crucial for understanding how things develop not only over the last 20 to 30 years but particularly in the last 10 years with the rise of the hostile environment where there were certainly one or two former civil servants I spoke to who had been involved in designing hostile environment policies who more or less said they knew it was wrong or they knew it wouldn't achieve what it was setting out to achieve but they felt first of all it's the civil services job to to do what what ministers ask of them but also they had to look like they were competent because they didn't want to be seen as not fit for purpose again. So the agreement for instance I reached with Nicolas Sarkozy to have immigration security on French soil and subsequently on the Eurostars to Belgium and to Paris was pretty crucial because it immediately reassured people that we had a functioning system that would deal with the situation before people got here and 32,000 people were stopped in the year leading up to the pandemic from actually reaching Britain because of those controls. Now that probably was the most effective administrative measure that I managed to get them to take whilst we were trying to sort out the massive backlog in the system of those who were here and of course you might recall we had an amnesty from those who'd been in the UK before 2000 and who were families and we thought we were giving an amnesty to 50,000 by the time we processed them something in the region of 150,000 people had actually been dealt with under that amnesty. Now you can just feel from me describing that what the enormity of that backlog must have been so we were dealing with a system that almost hid the problem and we were trying to reveal it because it's really struggling that what you end up with if you're not careful is a massive cohort of people who are simply under the radar they're working living illegally it's bad for them and it's bad for the rest of us. And in a way Daniel there's a line from that isn't there to the sort of what was called the hostile environment now it's called the compliant environment isn't it sort of slightly less nasty but also kind of sinister but you know you end up with this approach which is about sort of trying to make people's lives difficult in the hope that they'll go away. Yeah well one of the sort of big questions I had with the work for this piece was sort of how much of what we now know about the hostile environment and what we found out as the Windrush scandal was exposed and so on can you put down to specific policies that were introduced by Theresa May or people who came after her and how much is there actually a continuity between what's been happening in the last 10 years and what was happening in the decade or so before that. There actually is a lot of continuity because what you have from the late 90s onwards is the the sort of increasing emphasis put on security and finding ways to contain what is seen as a political problem. You have labor governments building structures that maybe the intent was to get this balance between sort of the soft and the hard I think was how David put it to me when I interviewed him but it's the hard bits that really end up enduring such as the hugely expanded network of immigration detention centers that were built in the 2000s but then when the conservatives come in at the head of the coalition government after 2010 you see this kind of acceleration in what's happening partly because resources are sucked out of the system due to austerity policies but also because they're at the same time trying to enforce an even harsher form of immigration control which isn't only aimed at say managing asylum but really starts reaching out into all of these different bits of society and I think the very often this ends up getting talked about as simply a political issue you know sort of so how do politicians strike a balance keep the press happy keep voters happy and so on but all the way through this whatever trade-offs are made between security and openness and so on there are the lives of individuals at stake at the center of this and not only is this a question of whether people are legal or illegal but the dysfunctional way in which the home office is home office manages immigration combined with the political hostility that I think has been dominant means that people from all walks of life with all different forms of immigration status and also British citizens themselves end up getting caught up in this system and having their lives destroyed. David I always had a bit of you mentioned it the EU accession countries there and there's always a bit of a feeling to some extent when Theresa May was home secretary for example that the government got tougher and tougher on non-EU migrants because there was this whole other bit of migration that it couldn't control and they kept setting these targets and of course they couldn't meet them and so they were you know got sort of the tone got nastier and nastier towards non-EU migrants because that was the bit that they could control. I wonder whether you think there's the possibility of a sort of reset now post Brexit now there isn't this this sort of bit of migration that you know the free movement that flows freely I wonder whether there's a sort of political shift there that that might take place. Well the rhetoric with the points system is that at the moment but the layout of the so-called new immigration policy and reset is cloud cuckoo land it's setting up to fail and I think we'll lead to great mistrust because it suggests that we can simply have a two-tier system for asylum where we throw people back to some unspecified country when they've arrived here with the wrong documentation or because they've been smuggled and we'll only acknowledge people as true asylum seekers if they arrive with documentation well if they get here with a correct passport and all the necessary papers they'll probably be refused asylum on the grounds that they weren't at risk in their own country and they were able perfectly well to travel so we're heading for a nightmare on that and we're heading for complete contradiction in terms of economic migration where we might end up saying that we're quite happy to have people with skills we need but not allowing those with the skills to reach here if you've got two million pounds you can simply come you don't have to invest it you just have to buy shares it's a crazy system and I think we're heading for a real fall on whatever problems we had and we did make mistakes what I think will pale into insignificance in the next five to ten years who knows that's probably a good sort of portentous note on which to end I think um and uh Daniel and David Blunkett thank you very much thank you thanks now a couple of weeks ago I came across a really fascinating essay about the government's plans to level up the country titled the politics of levelling up it explores the pretty seismic realignment currently happening in UK politics and why levelling up is an opportunity for the conservative party to try and find its footing with new voters all the while trying to hold on to some of their traditional ideologies but there are flaws with this plan one being that 18 months after first publishing their manifesto no one including ministers have quite grasped what it means to level up so how can they follow through my colleague Peter Walker spoke to one of the authors of that essay I read Will Jennings professor of political science and public policy at the University of Southampton brilliant so Will many many thanks for uh coming on the show um you have literally days ago co-authored and published um an academic paper called the politics of levelling up so you as much as anyone should know you know if a voter to ask what is levelling up you know what exactly does it mean well well the irony is in some regards that no one really knows and that's true both of voters who I think are still grappling with this phrase a bit like one of these phrases that we throw around in Westminster politics and academic circles uh with with abandon you know ordinary voters don't really think about leveling up in or don't understand it but to be honest the government's not sure either the the government just recently appointed a new policy chief for levelling up Neil O'Brien who's advising the prime minister and that the reason for that is actually you know on being elected Boris Johnson talked about um leveling up you know kind of repaying the trust of voters in the places that had put their put their faith in the conservatives for the first time but actually it's not very clear what leveling up there's a there's an array of different policies that have been kind of thrown around but as a as a policy agenda it's actually quite incoherent and it's not yet clear precisely what the real aspirations are in terms of social economic outcomes is part of it just this idea of almost having like flashy one-off projects in certain towns it does feel that a reasonable amount of leveling up is I don't know directing money at people who feel they've been ignored by London for a bit too long I mean so far a huge amount of the emphasis has been actually on the the narrative of responding to people who feel they've been neglected by Westminster so in many regards levelling up is a response to that feeling of disaffection resentment towards Westminster and we see in the survey data that you know very strong evidence that the further people are from London they feel that government doesn't care about their area they feel lower levels of trust in MPs and so to date things like the towns fund have been ways that the government's been able to demonstrate that it's listening to voters and so in that regard so far levelling up is is about responding to feelings of neglect in areas as much as being a large-scale program of spending and this is something which the conservatives and particularly Boris Johnson have been able to kind of engage in quite well there's this paradox almost you mentioned in the paper that a lot of people seem to find politicians kind of quite untrustworthy but in a sense it almost doesn't matter because they also rely on them an awful lot to kind of do things is this almost something that Boris Johnson's been able to take advantage of well Boris Johnson is a particularly unusual politician in this regard I mean I think it's important that COVID has shown us a real power box at the heart of contemporary British politics which is that people are very just trusting of politicians in general and they certainly don't trust you know if you're asking an opinion poll or a survey you know do people trust Boris Johnson to tell the truth they'll say no but at the same time token a lot of the research we've done last year using a lot of focus groups around kind of looking at COVID and the government's response is actually that deep down people have a latent trust in the government to look after them to care for them and I think leveling up is part of that same expression but people feel their error has been neglected by politicians over many years and there's been obviously been a conservative government for a decade yet deep down they're willing to put their trust in politicians who'll say they listen they hear and they care and I think Johnson is interesting and I think again a opponent's misjudged because I think it's easy just to see him as a kind of you know an inauthentic politician who's it's all an act but actually in some way voters see him as very authentic and not in the regard that you know you know the Boris Johnson act isn't something that's suddenly constructed but they think that he does care and he's different and so that kind of differentness is actually really important in leveling up because it's about part of this political realignment we're going through that old party loyalties are slowly fraying and that's part of a very long standing process and he offers something different that's different to the conservative party actually but also just different to Westminster politicians in general well he's offering a completely new Tory thing well not completely new but certainly one that hasn't been seen in the same way for quite some time which is this idea of these quite interventionist and reasonably high spending economic policies with this kind of social conservative with a small c culture war etc etc is leveling up a kind of fairly integral part of the first aspect of that of promising to intervene in a quite kind of unconservative way i mean i think it's it's really worth being skeptical on this front that this does so far represent a huge ideological shift for Johnson or the conservatives i mean actually if you look at you know Johnson's you know history although he was mayor of London he didn't really have a hugely interventionist approach there and if you look at many of his speeches over the years in many ways he was appealing to the to the right of the conservative party and and the sorts of sums that we're seeing in terms of leveling up some of them are substantial but often things like the towns fund in the broader scheme of government spending are not huge interventionist programs they're not actually about expanding the size of the state in the sort of way that you might expect of a really kind of expansionist policy and so i think that what's going to be interesting is the extent to which that interventionism shifts and looks into other areas of social economic life and you know monthly one of the challenges in terms of turning around struggling towns you know deprived towns which is part of this agenda is that many of these places really require quite substantial interventions in terms of social economic policy whether it's education skills and so forth and things like kind of towns fund deals that are 25 million pounds you know to a kind of town to you know to refresh its high street or so forth in the wider scheme of things are quite small compared to the sorts of substantial interventions that are going to be required if if this talk of leveling up opportunity is going to be delivered i think that's where it's really important for the jury still to be out because we still really have haven't seen much meat on the bones yet of of what what this leveling up agenda will look like so is this is there still a danger that leveling up could end up just being peppering around the country with a few symbolic projects you talk in the paper about government by a spectacle is this almost part of it just almost like showing voters that you care without necessarily changing that much i think i think that the spectacle is really important because it is about the demonstration that government cares i mean finally one i think it's often it's said i think wrongly that previous governments haven't attended to these issues many governments have tried and failed to address the deep geographical inequalities in our economies in society in in britain both in the last 20 years but over a much longer period and actually many of the roots are out of our economic inequalities and regional inequalities go back hundreds of years and so in terms of turning places around it's a much much bigger push because there's actually a kind of a history of policy interventions measures from whitehall that have tried and failed it's a varying different degrees to actually address these problems and i guess on the other side of the political equation you have well both what labor can potentially do to respond to this but also this idea that perhaps some of the traditional conservative areas whether the kind of cumulative belts etc etc are going to react negatively to this do you get the sense that that this could be a factor i think long term it's really interesting about what's happening to the conservative party right now i actually think in some ways this disproportionate focus on what's happened to the labor party we all know that the labor party like many social democratic parties across the world faces particular structural challenges to its votes in former industrial areas with the fraying of people's identification and loyalty to the party and the changing nature of the society and economy the shrinking of the working class but i actually think leveling up on this new agenda points to a rather strange electoral coalition that the conservatives have put together which is conservative voters in the in the shires and the suburbs who may have quite different visions for the economy and society and and and you know traditional conservative voters who favor a smaller state lower taxation may as time goes on become increasingly skeptical about a more interventionist state and i think that's the real challenge for the conservatives under boris johnson you know it's a big question for conservatives ideologically people who consider themselves conservatives is what modern conservatism stands for that seems to be quite a profound question that we haven't really scratched the surface with in terms of leveling up yet one final thing i mean you you you make the point that there's this talk about leveling up whilst in most places public service is still being cut back and you also say leveling up will this is direct quote eventually crash into the hard fiscal reality that not everywhere can be leveled up it is basically leveling up a kind of political project with a sell by date is it intended almost just to win the conservatives another election or perhaps two but in the long run do you think it can actually achieve all that much it comes down to the root of this the lack of coherence about what leveling up is concerned with by various estimates there are possibly around a thousand towns in the uk and you can't actually just give every tower in the uk a large pot of pot of money and say and say you know get on with it and so and actually what we've seen with the towns fund is that a fraction of that that that wide set of towns have been given funding there's a little bit of confusion about whether or not leveling up is really about regional equality and it's about the rest of the country you know catching up with london which is kind of the driver of economic growth or whether it's about the difference between towns and cities it kind of comes back to this question of actually how how much does boris johnson and the conservatives really believe in redistribution really believe in intervention and that ultimately is going to come down to the size of the state and the extent of of public spending and as we exit covid it would be foolish to think that we won't face particular fiscal challenges and so i think that's going to be the moment at which we start to understand a little bit better what leveling up actually means well i guess as with all things in politics time will tell professor will jellings thank you very much thanks there'll be a link to both will's essay and daniel's home office long read on today's episode description on the guardian website and for anyone wanting to hear more about a far less welcoming post-brexit attitude to greeting eu citizens at the uk border listen to wednesday's episode of our sister podcast today in focus rafael bear talks to anushka astana about a new hostile environment for eu citizens but that's all from us this week make sure to listen to politics weekly extra on friday last week the u.s supreme court agreed to hear a mississippi case which could roll back decades of abortion rights which got jonathan frieden thinking about the arguments for and against reforming the supreme court to discuss all of that he speaks to former deputy council to president obama christoper kang so do tune in for now though i want to thank our guests sonja soda peter walker daniel trilling lord blanket and will jennings the producer is daniel stevens i'm heather stuart please look after yourselves and thanks as always for listening so you