 This is The Guardian. This week I'm in the city of Plymouth on England's southwest coast ahead of next week's local elections. With a week to go, the cost of living is really on people's minds. In my house now we don't use the other. We now use the halogen cooker because that was cheaper. They also have a lot to say about party dates. I voted for Boris to be in and he pretty much kicked me in the head really. But although Boris Johnson's law-breaking came up time and time again, most people weren't keen on kissed Starmer either. There's just nothing dynamic about him. He's not like a dynamic personality. So where does that leave politics and the immediate future of the country? I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Week in the UK for The Guardian. It's a really beautiful day. We just arrived in Plymouth, a place that I've been on journalistic maneuvers many times. We're here because of next week's local elections. Big test for Boris Johnson and his government. Big test for kissed Starmer and the Labour Party as well. This city's politics are divided pretty evenly between the Conservatives who run the City Council at the moment and the Labour Party. It voted 60% for Brexit. It's a fairly big city that's a long way from London. There's a lot going on here basically. I've always found that if you want to understand which way the political wind's blowing, this is a really, really good place to come. So we're going to essentially spend quite a long day here talking to as many people as we can and trying to find out what on Earth is going on with this country. Right, our first stop is a meeting on the actual campaign trail while they're knocking doors and canvassing with Tudor Evans, who's been the leader, the Labour leader of Plymouth City Council on four different occasions. And he's still at it. He wants a fifth go. We are finally in the company of Tudor Evans OBE. But tell us where we are. So we're in Butth Park Road in Honwick Knoll. Yeah. And Honwick Knoll with Zoe Riley, who's the candidate. Hello Zoe. And Labour activists, we're here because this is a ward that last year we lost for the first time ever. And it was that recombination of, you know, the right wing vote, which had been split between UKIP and Tory, that recombined last year. Right. And I think it was a Covid thing. I think it was a... This was the vaccine bounce, so-called. Yeah. And this year, what we've got and beginning to discover is the party gate bounce. And people are getting increasingly angry with every day that's going by. You know, we're coming out with the Keir Starmer thing, the final demand thing. Oh, and picture of Keir Starmer on the other two. Yeah, well, unlike some parties, we're not afraid to put our leader on us. He's not quite setting people's soul on fire, I feel. By rights. Yeah, by rights. Not just because of party gate, because Boris Johnson raised people's hopes enough, a lot of people, to vote for him in the spirit of hope. And somehow Brexit would represent change. Yeah. And he's let him down, right? And as you say, we've got this cost of living crisis, which I've had lots of conversations, really upsetting, very moving conversations about. Now, that should make for a change moment. And we're not there yet. This isn't 97, is it? No, well, no. 2010 even, from the Tories' perspective. All right, so in Plymouth in 1995, right, we won 55 out of 60 council seats on an anti-poll tax gig in 1997. We didn't win that many seats on the council. All I'm saying is Blair moments are rare. And you remember Kinnock, how far ahead in the polls he was, and then 1992. So, you know, forgive me, we're not a presidential system here. This is about who's going to be the bins next year. I am old enough to remember when they hated Kinnock, they hated John Smith for 10 minutes. They didn't hate Blair in the beginning, but they hated him at the end. They hated Ed Miliband, they hated Jeremy Corbyn. So, you know, if they're neutral on Keir Starman, that's a massive success. OK, good. That's very good. Right. Come on, you've got to watch what you do there. Shall we go on over one, then? Yeah. They're very keen now. They've thought we're talking with you. I don't know why. My name's Meg. Oh, lovely. Just out of the Labour Party today, head of the elections on the 5th. Wondering if you'd thought about if you might be offering us your support? No. No worries. Can I give you some leaflets anyway? No, thanks. No worries. Olivia, please have a lovely day. Hi, I'm looking for Janet and Keith Dicker. I'm Tudor Evans from the Labour Party. Oh, hello, there. How are you? So, question, will you be voting? Because not everybody votes in the elections, do they? Only about the third. But are you a regular proper? We do, normally. Yeah. Well, this is sort of the place that elections are fought on, really. It's a mixture, by the look of it, of social housing and places that are what canvases call owner-occupied. And, you know, this is where all those cliches you hear might actually mean something. We are in the presence here of hard-working families, and there's just about managing and people experiencing the fabled cost of living crisis. But we're also in a place where it feels like the Labour Party is by no means home and dry, right? It's sort of doggedly fighting for every vote. That's what it feels like. Despite people's sort of outrage about Boris Johnson and how much the bills are and all that. Hello, it's Zoe. Hi, sorry, I'm Sarah. We're here from The Guardian. Hello, how are you? We're making a podcast about Plymouth and the elections and things. It actually explains why there's six people on the other side. I know, there's a little people in a small space. Can I ask you a couple of questions? Of course. Are you going to vote next week? Yes. Do you know who you're going to vote for? Not Conservative. And have you voted Conservative in the past? I have. So you've voted Conservative in the recent past? Possibly in the last election. Well, 20 in the general election. You voted for Boris Johnson. And you're not voting Conservative this time? No. Why not? I work for the NHS. So I've made a lot of sacrifices, as well as others have, during the Covid and a few other things. And I just think it's time for something different. Right. Is there any particular events or news stories? I think just all of it, really. Just how he is, how he's behaved in recent months. You just know. What, parties and all that stuff? They'd say, well, we had a great vaccine rollout and... I'm not sure. My grandad of Covid last year, so my mum and I weren't able to go and see her. I have held dying people's hands because their families haven't been able to come in. So it's not fun. It's not funny. Why did you vote for him three years ago? I voted for Johnny Mercer, predominantly. He's the local MP. Because he's the local MP. Because my other half is in the services. And then Johnny Mercer, to make this clear, is Ex-Force, it's right. Yes. So it kind of went down that route. But did you think better of Boris Johnson three years ago? Yes. What did you think he was then? Can I swear? You want? Yeah, I didn't think he was an asshole, but now he turned out as an asshole. For whatever better word. Quite a simple storyline, that really, isn't it? Yeah. Wow. He just doesn't behave... You know, you have an idea of how someone should behave, don't you? Particularly when they're in a position that he's in. And they don't feel that he's behaved in the manner that he should. Right. And that phrase, the cost of living crisis a lot at the minute. Yes. Are you feeling that yourself? Massively. Go on. I filled up my car the other day and it cost me £75 to fill it up. I know that feeling. Yeah. My husband works in Poole at the moment. And where it used to cost him £100 to fill up the tank, it's costing £150, £160. So we've talked at the point that he might not be able to come home at weekends and look after our daughter so I can work. What do you think of this fellow? I've got a leaflet with cast armour here. What do you make of him? He seems all right. I've not looked into it, but he seems to be fair. Not an asshole to use the term you use at the moment. Not yet. There's always time. That's a good way to end. Right, thank you very much. Do you want to get the number the next time we might come? Will you come back to Pemmican five or six months? Yeah. Could we maybe come and talk to you again? Absolutely. Although I felt like our chat with Vicky was really important, on the way to our next location, Maz, the producer, got a bit concerned that all the anger about Boris Johnson might not reflect the whole public mood. To get back to politics, I suppose, what was I saying? My concern about that, my concern about that is that that's a snapshot in a labour area. So is it really? Yeah, well, of course you make all those qualifications because it's thoroughly unscientific and all the rest of it. But the bigger point is there are two things that come out of that sort of encounter with people, which is you start to get common themes, right? And I think it's really interesting that everybody knows about so-called partygate and everybody talks about it in the context of their own experience, right? And then secondly, just the way people say things, right? That's what... Look at poll data until you're blue in the face, but unless you hear the way people talk about stuff, you don't hear it or hear what you should be hearing. And people... There's a moral sense to it, right? People feel righteously angry. And if you're at the receiving end of righteous anger and you're a politician, you're a dangerous place to be. That's what I mean. And you're a conservative of all people. These people who market themselves as the party of law and order and high standards and all, right? Yeah. Are you still not having it? No, I just feel like there is a certain ambivalence with some people. Are you kidding? We've spoken to about 20 people and has anyone said anything really? A few people have said, yeah, they got the vaccine rollout right and stuff. But the idea that he tells lies is pretty universal. But they also, in the same breath they're saying that they all tell lies. That's true. So you're going left? That is true. News from Plymouth, whose fight for reconstruction makes a story worthy of a glorious past of a proud city. Ever since the heart of Plymouth was torn out by Gurnings bombers, the determination to rebuild and start afresh has never once wavered. Another step towards a happier future for a city whose spirit has refused to die. Wow. All right, John, let's get a... Now that we're here, tell us what we... So you look at that. What are we looking at? You're not impressed by that. This is Al Marder Way, which is the heart of the city centre of Plymouth. But this was built after the war in a spirit of optimism and reconstruction and pretty careful planning, really. I've read accounts of Plymouth where they talk about it as the welfare state city, which isn't like in the sense of everyone being on benefits. But it sort of symbolises that sort of collectivist thinking that took root after the war. And you can sort of feel it. It doesn't feel very British, does it? It feels like quite a sort of European space. Just a really, really wide street. And then these purpose-built post-war buildings, in their own way, I think, feel quite sort of hopeful and forward-looking. But, I mean, also, it was built for the age of the department store. So it does also feel a bit out of time at the same time. But I've spent many happy hours of my life box popping in here, which we're about to do again. So you've got loads of people here. Right, see you later. We had a chat with three generations of the same family, a grandmother, mum and young daughter. I wanted to know if they were feeling the pinch. And would you say that you're feeling the cost of living crisis yourself somewhat? Yeah, well, everything goes up. Food, just general stuff, even gas, electric. I'm telling you to turn the lights off, aren't I? I think sometimes the middle, sort of the work, people that are working, but not what we call affluent, affluent, rolling in money. I think sometimes they kind of get sort of stuck because we're not getting small amounts. But, you know... People used to talk about the squeeze middle. Yes, I think a bit like that maybe, because we don't get a lot of... They were reluctant to tell me who they usually voted for, but I got the sense they were sympathetic to the Conservatives. They said that all politicians were probably out for themselves. But when I suggested that Boris Johnson's behaviour set him apart, they cautiously defended him. He had a forward ride. He's had Covid, he's had Brexit, and to be honest, he did deal with it. But he made the laws and he broke them. Well, yes, I know, but don't they all? Haven't they continuously? They've been using politicians that have broken the law. Not like this, though. Perhaps. So are you likely to vote Conservative next year? Both Marm and Grandma told me they'd voted Conservative in 2019, but they admitted to recently wobbling slightly, though not enough to look elsewhere. You mentioned the Labour Party earlier. What do you think of Keir Starler? He sits on the fence a lot. Yeah, I haven't really, to be honest, late, he's not even been on the radar that I've noticed of late. No, I haven't noticed of late. Right, listen, we'll let you get on with your... Thank you very much. Bye. See, I'm old enough to remember what a sort of change moment in politics feels like, right, when you start to sense it. And you maybe sense it two or three years before it materialises in an election, but you know sort of things are shifting, right? And although people are talking in quite strong terms about Partygate and the fact that they don't think much of Boris Johnson and so on, right, that's not feeding through, is it, into a sense that everything's on the move. And that's partly because if you talk about Keir Starler, people either just say, well, he sits on the fence or there's not much going on. What we've got here is this very weird tension between dramatic political events, i.e. Partygate, the war in Ukraine, etc, etc. And people still being very, very standoffish about making different choices. It doesn't really feel like any big shift is afoot, does it? Excuse me. Sorry to interrupt. We are now living in a touch of strange rate. We work for the Guardian and the newspaper. And we are making a podcast, a radio, a glorified radio programme about life in Plymouth. Talking to people. Don't laugh. Can we ask you a couple of questions? How's life at the minute? Rubbish. Because it's everything's money, money, money, money, money, money. And single parent to kids who try getting the money to do just basic living stuff. Give me a sense of how hard is it weeks to work? It's very, very weak. I'm literally on my emergency on my electric until the middle of next week. Means I've got £5, I can't help. I don't have no lights on. I very rarely have TV on for the book except for the voice. That's it. I have to literally squimp and squirt save to do anything. And food? How is it with food? Food banks. If it wasn't for food banks, I wouldn't be able to survive. My kids are fine. I can, if I'm lucky, have a tinnosuit. Alright, big gal but I've still got to eat. By the time everything works out, I get £17 the whole month to actually spend a treat on myself. I'm not in a re-age with anything. I've got nothing else to outstand. I've got no debt. So I will buy myself a pouch at a back here with the doodad. That's my attitude. You know, everything else. My kids are happy. Is there anything you feel hopeful about looking ahead in the future? I mean, you've got kids, right? So someone gets you out of bed in the morning. Them? They're the only reason I get out of bed. They're the only reason I smile and don't shut up when I talk. I haven't got a feel. I don't have a feel and this is my problem. I'm like, wee wee wee wee. And I wait, you know, if I'd have to speak and stick up for people, I will speak and stick up for people because who else is going to sit? The people can't. If we are not, as the whole community, aren't able to talk, then we may as well just sit in our homes and just wait to die. But you need people to listen. You need Boris Johnson and whoever else. Oh, you rolled your eyes there. Why did you roll your eyes there? Let's not go down to party centre, actually. No, no, go on. Let's not because I think, you know, we've again mentally suffered. We're not allowed to do this. You know, I've got both my parents are both disabled, both really poorly. Both need a lot of support. I've been told, you know, we were all told we can't go to this place. We can't go and visit all these homes. I've got two vulnerable children, so I couldn't go and visit my parents while they're Mr. Party Green's out having a party. Now, won't be voting for him, that's for sure. Who might? You're talking about next Thursday, there's an election. Are you going to vote? I will be voting. Who are you going to vote for? I'm probably going for Labour. Tell me why? Because he's not in him. Because I don't... I just think... It doesn't matter who we vote for anyway. I honestly don't think the voice of the people is the ones that matter. It's how it looks. But you're determined not to vote. Have you voted Conservative in the past? I have done before. I voted for Boris to be in. And he pretty much kicked me in the head, really. The people that voted, he's basically turned around and said, well, don't see you later. And when you say Boris has kicked you in the teeth, it sounds like you think he's distant. I don't think he's in. He's not in for the people, I don't think. Did you think he was? Originally, I think, you know, you get it all the time. You get this big crusade of what this person's like. And then, actually, it's all lies. Personally, I'd like to take him and say, right, I tell you what, you live my life for a week. You know, there isn't any luxuries. You can't just go out and go, I'll go to the shop, I'll go to Mike's and Spencer's and get a nice packet of crisps. I have to go and get a multi-packet of cheap crisps that taste like crap. You know, live my life for a week. You must have read about suitcases full of booze and tables full of party food when you couldn't go out of your house. Don't, because they're really frustrating. I've got a sink, small bottle of cider in my fridge that's been in there for two and a half years. And I won't drink it unless it's an actual celebration. We've had birthdays, we've had New Year's, we've had a bit... I'm coming back to 40 this year. I'm going to drink that bottle. I don't care. Again, fair play. But don't, because I'll just get me frustrated. I'm supposed to be a happy day shopper. What part of Plymouth are you living? Stoness, just up the road. And what's your name? Lils. Nice to meet you, Lils. You too. Well, I don't know even where it started after a conversation like that. See, I was saying earlier this isn't a change moment. It is for her. There are so many cliches about people who need benefits to live and all the rest of it. And obviously what happens when you meet people is they just fade into nothing. You know, they're every... people who perhaps for a period need benefits to live on, are every bit as self-aware and articulate and confident and politically savvy as anybody else. It's just by some horrible lottery they've ended up in that position, you know. Yeah, I thought she was righteous, you know. That's a... I'd like to hear behind the dispatch box at Prime Minister's question. I really would, you know. Say, well, what am I meant to do? Because that's the question. Sorry, I'm well enough of it. I really, I was going to move like that thinking about it. Got to go round and round about, Jon. In half a mile, arrive at Devon Port. Ah, right. Hold on a minute. So there's your first sight of the sea. Well, you're looking down there into the sea off Devon Port, I think, so you'll get a sense of the sort of naval aspect of Plymouth. We were on our way to meet a Tory councillor and talk about the turmoil in the local party. But first we stopped by Devon Port. It's an area that's been hugely regenerated and rebuilt. And it's one of the poorest parts of Plymouth, with more people claiming universal credit than in any other part of the city. It's also a very strong community, where people make a point of looking after each other. Yes, yes, yes. Are you the manager? Yes, I am, yes. This is Jon. Hi, nice to meet you. Sarah. Hi, Sarah. Hello. So you can sit wherever you want. She took us to meet some of her regular backgammon players in an echoey and bare room set out with chairs and tables. The bay window was filled with piles of nappies, toilet rolls and washing up liquid to give out to people in need. You're going to talk to this guy. You're called Jon. I'm Jon. So am I. Nice to meet you. Oh, you're a good student. There you go. Do you follow politics much? I used to. I was a major member of the local UKIP party. Were you? During the referendum. Yes, I was involved in UKIP right up until and past the referendum. Right. After the referendum. So you got what you wanted? Oh, indeed. Yes, I've been a member since mid-1990s. It's not what I wanted. It's not what I wanted. Not what I wanted, I don't care. That's all right. Be of the different. Yes. Who did you vote for in 2019? The last general election. Last general election, I voted for Tory to my shame. I've been a lifelong Tory until, until UKIP. But then you voted Conservative again in 2019? Yes. You voted for Boris Johnson in other words. Yes. And how do you feel now about that? I think you're an absolute waste of space. But did you ever think any different of Boris Johnson? Yes. Well, you thought he was the coming man and he'd be all right. Yes. He was doing things, he achieved things. When he was mayor of London, he was achieving things and he spoke, he talked the talk and walked the walk as far as I'm concerned. He did said what he was planning to do and a lot of it he accomplished. What changed your mind about it? The lies he told recently about party gates, that is absolutely appalling. He should be thrown out of office. You feel really strongly about all that? I do. But the thing is who is to replace him? I don't know. I can't think of anybody who would replace him. Liz Truss. Are you serious? Jeez. And now is your backgammon. I think I tried playing backgammon in the past, there was never much cop. Come down on Monday morning, we'll teach you. OK, you're on. We might have to keep politics out of it, I think if we talk any more it would get a bit testy. A gentleman in the picture looks like a guy. Sitting behind John was David, who was noticeably rolling his eyes at John's comments. Have you voted Conservative in the recent past? Never voted Conservative in my life. I'm working, I've been working class. So you've tended to vote Labour now? I've always voted Labour. When you sort of see politics on the television now and K. Stalmer fighting out with Boris Johnson and all. I don't think we like K. Stalmer. I don't know, he's just... There's just nothing dynamic about him. You know, he's not like a dynamic personality and politician and you look at him and think, yeah, he would be really good if Boris went, we got rid of Boris. He would really, you know, he's... I don't know, they just... Labour hasn't got nobody at the moment. That was quite an interesting exchange of a lot of sort of diverse views. It's got a little bit testy on occasion, but the point is as soon as we leave this room, you'll be the best of friends and you'll get back to playing backgammon. Yes, I would hope so. You may be a big fighter, but I don't think so. I think we'll be playing backgammon again. In that work, maybe the country's not quite as divided as some people make out in that sense. People rub along OK. No, we don't talk politics here. I think if we did talk politics here, then the club wouldn't be as friendly as it is. It's by not talking politics that we are OK. I'll just forget we were ever here. We have done, I remember. Thank you very much indeed. Thank you for the green OK, good. Do you want to talk about where we're going? I'm so tired of forgotten. We're going to meet Maddy Bridgeman. There you go. We're going to meet Maddy Bridgeman, a Conservative councillor, to get their side of all this. I mean, you know, the Lib Dems don't really get a look in Plymouth. There's not much green party presence to speak of. Politics is pretty much part of the problem. I think we're going to get a look at the politics here. The politics here is pretty much part of a large number of independents. A lot of them have recently left the Conservative party. They've become independent. This is a two party city, so we're going to see the Conservatives now. Where now? Christ, Mars Wrigley. What's that? I heard the bit of Mars bottles and Wrigley's chewing gum. Presumably that's what Mars Wrigley is. Maddy Bridgeman is a Tory councillor who's invited us to a café called Al's Kitchen on an industrial estate in Estover, north-easter Plymouth City Centre. Al is a friend of Maddy's and runs the café, which also serves as a kind of community centre. Quite a lot of manufacturing industry still in Plymouth, obviously. This is where it happens, right? Yeah, term left. We arrived on a big industrial estate, which at first seemed strange, but there's a huge residential area behind it, which is Maddy's council ward. What? Come on, then. Heavy with the scent of mint. It does smell of mint, doesn't it? There's obviously a mints factory locally. Come on, though. That is such a strong smell. Wrigley's fans, Wrigley's. As if being surrounded by the smell of mint wasn't weird enough, we also found out there were wild deer running around the place. It's lovely, yes. Look, actually, behind you, I'm not David Bellamy. Oh, that's what it is. Well, deer running around in industrial estate. Yeah, it's all around here, so you'll see, right, they don't really need to cut the grass. Now I want to see a deer. I'll be disappointed if I leave without having seen a deer, thank you very much. First of the day. So, Maddy, here we are. We're ten days from the May elections, and it's very close in Plymouth, right? Yeah, potentially. What do you think is at stake in this election? Why does it matter? In all honesty, um... I don't know, actually. Can I just have a second? Yeah. There's nothing to explain... At this point, we probably need to pause and explain a couple of things. The Conservative group on Plymouth Council, which has led the city since 2021, has been in an apparent state of disarray for quite a while. There have been resignations, suspensions and changes of leadership on the Conservative side. Maddy herself says she's been badly treated, something her Conservative colleague denies. But then, if I was a Plymouthian voter, why should I vote Conservative if the Conservative Party is in such a state of disarray? OK, so I've gone out to my voters. My leaflet, which I'm happy to show you, isn't about what I'm going to do. It's proving what I've already done. So, for example, I've always been an avid litter picker. You'll be speaking to, sort of, obviously Al, but now it's Calf in a minute. They know my track record. I mean, it's tough for the... I mean, you can say that the Conservative Party has been the author of its own misfortunes. So you've got all these local issues, and then I've been talking to people here about how they're going to vote all day. And just about all of them have mentioned Partygate, and the disarray the Conservative Party seems to be in in central government as well. Yeah. What do you think of all that? Well, I can't really comment on central government. You can't comment on Partygate. Well, the thing is, I think it's... I had people dying in care homes in this ward, and people writing to me because they couldn't go and hold their children's hands when they had Covid in hospital. Their Nana's hand and a kiss of goodbye when she was dying of Covid, you know, in care homes and everything else. So they're bitter about that, absolutely. But then again, we've got to remember Boris did get us through Brexit when Theresa May couldn't. And also the whole thing was, you know, because we were out of the EU, I think the rollout of the vaccination programme was much, much stronger. So I think we need to think about the bigger items. And also, I don't actually think there's anyone stronger than Boris to actually take over. I wouldn't want Keir Starmer to take over. No, I'm sure you will. But you're a car-carrying conservative. Absolutely. Absolutely. The thing is, with thingies with me, I'm brutally honest. You ask me a question, I will answer it. Shall we talk to Al? Yes. So Al? Yes, hello. How long has your business been here? I've been here eight years, just waiting to renew the lease for under three. Are you a conservative? I am a conservative. We've been out talking to people on the proverbial doorstep all day. We're going to vote. And just about everyone we spoke to has mentioned Boris Johnson and parties and rule-breaking. How do you feel about that yourself? Yes, naughty boy. But can you look yourself in the mirror and say you never broke one rule during lockdown? Yes. You never got less, closer than two metres to somebody. You never sneezed without sneezing into your armpit or you went out somewhere without a mask on? Certainly, when there was a mask mandate on, everywhere I went I wore a mask. I don't know about sneezing. But the point is, I didn't make the rules. No, I didn't make the rules and I followed them. And if the feller who makes the rules breaks the rules, where are we? Yeah, he's been punished. He's had his fine. He's paid for it. Broadly speaking, do you think it's dealt with and you're all right with it? I think it was a silly billy. And it's been dealt with to a degree. Better the devil, you know. And you still think he's the right man for the job? I actually do think he's a very good PM. He's got a lot done this time. And let's face it, he's had a hell of a lot to deal with. He's come in, dealt with Brexit and he's dealt with the pandemic. Okay. Wow. Well, it's true. Right. Thanks again. Thank you. Thank you very much. Well, it's good, isn't it, to hear the other side of the coin, really? There are people, I mean, admittedly, people introduced to us by a conservative candidate. So you take that with a pinch of salt. But there are people who sincerely say that they think what Boris Johnson did wasn't right and so on, but they're prepared to sort of give him the benefit of the doubt. But it's only two and a half years since he was missed to get Brexit done, you know. And he got an 80 seat majority. And I suppose Al is the voice of the sort of voter who made that happen. It wasn't really long ago. And also, Al has seen the wonders of economic intervention, ironically enough, hasn't he? Laid on by a conservative chancellor, which is that his business was kept afloat. But the fact that he had three of his staff fitter-load and he got quite a lot of grants and he had to help out money and that's kept him afloat. Oh, I'd feel pretty good about Rishi Sunak. If I was in that position, I think. I don't know. It's a big thing, though, isn't it? It's still the key topic of conversation. I got a feeling there a bit like, well, this must happen all the time in people's workplaces and around the breakfast table and at the bus stop and all that. Partygate, which broke as a news story months ago, didn't it? Four or five months ago, it's still conversational topic number one, isn't it? And that gives you a sense that I'm not sure the government's not going to get out from under it. That leaves open the question of whether the Labour Party's in any position to really do well on the back of it. But it's a big thing, isn't it? It's just this thing that sticks to Boris Johnson now. Thanks for listening. We want to say a big thank you to all the people who spoke to us in Plymouth. I'm also going to mention The Guardian's new daily newsletter called First Edition. It'll give you the day's top stories and explain why they matter. Start your day with clarity and find First Edition in your inbox every morning at 7am. This episode was produced by Natalie Kutena, original music was by Axel Kukutie, and the executive producers are Maz Eptahars and Nicole Jackson. I'll be back next Thursday.