 This is The Guardian. It's been a long summer of heatwaves, strikes and growing fears over a so-called cost of living crisis that's turning into a huge social emergency. Running alongside all of this has been the seemingly never-ending Conservative Party leadership election. I think it's an important duty of the Prime Minister. I'm ready to do that. We'll finally find out who our next Prime Minister is going to be on Monday. Rishi Sunak's chances seem to have faded away and it looks like Liz Truss will be faced with the task of somehow dealing with rising inflation, soaring energy bills, a likely recession and the very real possibility of two-thirds of all UK households facing fuel poverty in January. What do you do? You can't feed your kids or anything like that. It's going to be terrible, absolutely terrible. I don't know what's going to happen. Last week, Politics Weekly UK went to Birmingham to ask people there how they're preparing for winter and get a sense of our immediate political future at a Tory hustings event. I'm John Harris and you're listening to Politics Weekly UK for The Guardian. Well, this is where the summer ends, folks, essentially. On a grey and overcast day, muggy and humid. Sums up. Sums up how everyone's feeling. We're in Birmingham, the day that Sunak and Truss do their thing at a big event for Tory party members. With me in the car is Maz, one of Politics Weekly UK's producers. Back to the swimming pools. Back to the swimming pools. All joking apart, I mean, that's the other thing, isn't it? It's that clearly it's been building up for a long, long time, but I think you can argue that the last week or ten days is when the sort of severity of the so-called cost of living crisis, this dire social emergency has really, really hit home. And the main person it's going to land on is Liz Truss. If I had any political ambition, I don't think now would be the same. I'd choose to take over as Prime Minister. All right, John, we're in Birmingham on our way to Longbridge. Why are we going there? Well, the most important thing to say about where we are is that we're in the constituency of Northfield, which was won by the Conservatives in 2019 with a majority of not much more than 12 or 1300 voters. It's become a really, really marginal seat where a lot of people here will have voted conservative probably for the first time in their lives in 2019. I don't know whether you can say whether this is part of the Red Wall, but sort of broadly it fits that picture. So until 2005, the big employer here was the carworks at Longbridge, this really long-standing car factory going back, I think, 100 years. Before it closed. And I would imagine a lot of people here, older people, feel a really profound sense of loss about the fact that carworks isn't there? Which again, you know, puts it in line with the sort of seats that the Tories won from Labour in 2019. There were a lot of places like that. A sense of loss, quite Brexit-y places. And the feeling really that the Labour Party is going to be in the right place. And the feeling really that the Labour Party had lost touch with its old core vote. And we're here to go to a hustings tonight, is it? The hustings is at the National Exhibition Centre, the NEC. Not that far from here. It's just a good opportunity, I suppose, to talk to people about the state of their lives, the so-called cost of living crisis and how that reads over into their view of politics. Particularly who's going to take over from Boris Johnson, which unless something really, really strange happens, is going to be a list. So this is a big retail development all built around the Greatly Car Park on the site of the old Longbridge Carworks. That was the old British economy of engineering and manufacturing, and this is the thing that replaced it, going to shops. We're in this part of Birmingham today. Can I ask you a very quick couple of questions? Yes, I think so, yes. I wonder how's life? And I ask you that, you'll know why I ask you that, because of the cost of living crisis and all that. We've got to put up with this, haven't we? It's just one of those things. And how is it for you? Fine. Is it? Yes. You live to your means, don't you? Right. But you're not worrying about this great hike in bills coming up? We're not worried about it at all. But then we're retired. We're retired, right. Do you worry about other people? So when you hear about cost of living, are you worried about the country as a whole? Or do you feel like... No, it depends on your rate. And why not? Because to me, it's obvious, and it's quite simple. We were in a pandemic. Economy had got to go to the wall, and we borrowed, and we borrowed, and we borrowed. Where do people think that's coming from? It has to be paid for, and they all want to have pay rises. You've got to pay for what you're in debt for. We come from a generation that paid 15, 60% interest on mortgages. Yes. You follow politics much? Yes, to a certain extent. Have you been following Liz Trust versus Rishi Sunak? It's a joke. Is it? Yes. Why is it a joke? Just find me one person who can run the country properly. Is there someone you think can do that? Margaret Thatcher. Is there a wife? But Liz Trust wants us to think that she's the new Margaret Thatcher. She's not his shirt. Tell me why she isn't. There's only one person who could come up to her, and that was true to me. You liked her? I liked her very much. Yes, you did like her, and we thought she was our next. Boris Johnson? What did you think of him? A clown. But you're a servite of voters by the sound of it, right? Yes. And so you weren't impressed with Boris Johnson? Not at all. And you're not impressed with Liz Trust or Rishi Sunak? Not really. She wants to cut taxes, doesn't she? Yeah. You can't cut taxes until you pay everything off what you owe. So come to the next election when it's, in all likelihood, Liz Trust is going to be standing saying, well, vote for me again to be Prime Minister. What are you going to do? Not vote. Really? Yes. It was easier for your generation, though, to get on the housing ladder, and so on. It was. No, it wasn't. I suppose sort of what you're saying is that it was really hard for you. You did what you had to do. You buckled up, and you did it. Exactly. But it doesn't feel like there's much sympathy for other people because you feel like they should be doing what you're doing or what you did. It worked as hard as we did. We had two jobs when we were courting. We had three jobs. We had three jobs, really, to make a lot of money, to pay the deposit, to get married so we could have our own house. I'm not saying it isn't difficult for some people because there are some people out there that genuinely. Well, the youngsters, they go to the parents for money to buy the house. We couldn't do that. My dad came from the Gorgles in Glasgow. He didn't have shoes on his feet until he went to school. That's poor. But we've got a decent life, but we've worked for it. We stood there moaning and going to food banks and everything with cigarettes in the hands and a mobile phone. And then there's the other ones that will go down Broad Street on a Saturday night and spend a hundred quid. Is that clubbing? Is that a brush here? Exactly. And then they moan and pamper up the money and go to mom and dad. So I suppose we were a bit tough. We'd come from tough back then. Thank you so much. Lovely to be here. That's the...you've got to stop by an avocado for me. I am genuinely surprised at the lack of sympathy. No, I'm not really. Why? Because I think people's views are sort of forged or whatever the word is in their own experiences, right? And they probably did have to scrimp and save to get a deposit. And life was hard. And so the idea that someone who'd been at university and outwardly should be successful will have trouble getting on a housing ladder and can't get enough money to get there, that's kind of completely off your radar. What I thought was the single most interesting thing was that just not buying Listeros. I mean, God knows, right? She's gone out of her way to say, if you like Mrs Thatcher, I'm the candidate for you. And they've seen that and they don't like it. Not far away outside of Branchfield Poundland. We're another couple. Samantha and Louis, both in their 20s and recent home buyers. How old are you? Twenty-four. OK. How's life at the minute? It's OK. It's good. I'm on a week off, so it's great at the moment. You're particularly asking about living costs and things like that. Yes. I thought you were getting to that. Yeah. Yeah, the price of things has actually gone up significantly. Our weekly shops especially, they used to, just for me and me and my fiancee, they used to be about £40, £50. Now it's gone up to about £60, £65, £70, something like that. And we're actually cutting down on most of our things each week. What are you cutting down on? Just certain items of food shopping. So coleslaw, just things like cheese, some meats as well, things like that. Excuse me asking, bills wise? Yeah, bills wise, we brought our house last year, so we were lucky to be set within a fixed rate until this September. So it will be going up significantly from there. We're on a water meter, so we try and keep that down as much as possible. Our home insurance has gone up and we are quite worried about what the bills are going to be like in October for us with gas and electricity. What do you do for a living? I'm a trainee solicitor. OK. Do you follow politics much? Um, ish. OK. Yes and no. Louis is probably the most best one to ask on that. Really? That's my free answer, yeah. The last general election, 2019, which seems like 100 years ago now, the one just before the pandemic, who did you vote for? The US, the US as well. The Conservative, yeah, Boris. And would you vote Conservative again? Yeah, I think Conservative, but with somebody who can lead a lot better. Do you think Louis should count? Potentially, yes. I just feel if we had a Labour government, I feel like we'd get into significant more debt in the future. I see a short time it would be OK, but a long time I feel Labour wouldn't be able to keep up with different things in the market. Can I just ask your trainee solicitor, that's a pretty good job. What do you do? I'm a digital designer. Are you quite surprised that you have those good jobs and you're feeling the pinch? How does that feel for you? I'm not really that surprised. You should be, right? Trainee solicitor. I'm surprised. How does it feel that you're doing a job that in your mind is probably quite a good job, right? You're doing well for yourself. And you remember thinking about cutting back on cheese and coals? Yeah. But it can't be what you expect. We do try and budget things and everything, especially being so young and starting out. We do have to really watch what we're doing. Thinking about alternate second jobs. Are I working in the evenings or doing that? Yeah, things like that. Freelance work. I mean, it's disappointing and everything, but it's what it is really. It is what it is. We sort of just say that, but it makes you think how people who don't have the opportunity to actually have gone to university and had a good job, it makes you think how they're actually living now and how they're struggling and whether they have to take on, say, two, three jobs or something. It really does impact them significantly. Lovely to meet you. Thank you very much. Thank you so much. Thank you very much. So in an emergency, the people you have to think about the most clearly are the people who find life absolutely impossible and are at the sharp end of everything. But having said that, people in that position are really interesting because they've done everything that was required. They're sort of young, new property owners working as hard as they can. They've sort of bought whatever the vision is of life in 21st century Britain, particularly from the standpoint of the Conservative Party. They've done what's required. And they haven't got on the supermarket and count every penny. I'm thinking about second jobs. I'm thinking about second jobs. They're like the younger generation of that older conservative couple that we met. They were saying that we had to work hard and we have lots of jobs. I think they were a bit more sympathetic to the sort of plight of the wider public. It feels like we're in a new political phase now. Even when we were in those by-elections sometimes, I felt that we were still sort of stuck in Brexit world somehow. And everything has been shoved somewhere different now, hasn't it? It's interesting about how people sort of talk about scrimping and saving. There's a lot about individual choice and not much about the external circumstances which get people there. But it is quite disorientated because it's not what they were saying. Look where we are, right? We're in this retail park built on the site of a former car factory in which it's all about plenty, isn't it? Yeah. It's all about massive retail units full of everything you could possibly want. The size of this Mark's and Spencer. Yeah. This great big food hall over here. You know, you've got a massive branch of boots over there, all that great big toy shop there. That's all about the idea that you can afford to spend. And the one jarring note within it all is the Poundland over there. And who do we find outside the Poundland? A trainee solicitor who's thinking about taking a second or third job and is having to cut back on... Basic items of food. On basic food. And there's... there, that's the zycra. We've now come somewhere different in the Northfield constituency. This is a community centre which very recently sort of opened itself up to FoodCycle, which is a nationwide project. Which here means that every Tuesday at four o'clock a free meal is served to anybody who wants to come. And I think the sort of bigger reality around it is that the people we're about to meet are very, very aware of rising need for food and probably warmth and the sort of hard realities of this social emergency which is suddenly defining our politics. Hiya! Hello. This is John. Nice to meet you. Hi John. This is what's going on for where everybody eats. So what will happen is our guests will start to arrive shortly. So it's half three now. So the meal's served at four. So they can start turning up at any time like quarter to four o'clock. And then... What's the meal today? So we've got vegetable frittata, stuffed courgettes with sides. I think that's vegetables. And lemon drizzle cake which I've just tasted and it's absolutely amazing. So the guests will come. They'll have their meal and then before they leave they'll get a bag with some food to take with them as well. So it's way more than just a sit-down meal. It's different from a food bank because they're actually getting so much kind of all in one. So yeah. And again that varies each week to what we're donated. So you don't have to register. You don't need a referral. Anybody can come. That's why we don't know who's going to come that week and we don't know the numbers which kind of adds to the challenge. But also it just makes it a bit more accessible. So it could take some people a few weeks to feel comfortable to come. There's still a lot of stigma around it. I was at the Longbridge one last week and there was a family that came for the first time. And... I'll let one of those get in. And it was the delight and they were like, we can't wait to come back. We can't wait to come back. So it's just sometimes getting over that kind of step just makes the big difference. Do you want to come and meet the volunteers in the kitchen? So obviously you talked about the fact that this takes stigma away and all that. And we're not at a food bank. It's something different and so on. But doing this must give you a sense of need and the reality of people's lives. Oh yeah absolutely. And it's definitely changing. The people that we're kind of seeing. We're just getting more people contact us. Can they come? Are they allowed to come? Is it just for homeless people? The other thing is that people do actually come just because they're lonely. It's not actually about the food. So that's another thing that we try and talk about a lot. That helps break down the stigma. You have people that will come that you know you can kind of tell that they're struggling financially. But they'll tell you they're coming because they're lonely. Right. So yeah, so you see a really really broad range of people coming for different reasons. Our numbers have doubled since January. By four o'clock around 30 people have shown up at the centre. Which is a big turnout for a project that's only just started. Food cycle is non-secular but it's attached to the church led by Fiona the Vicar. So Widdecost is a great place to live. It's got a real constant of community. There's a whole mixture of people here. We're becoming increasingly diverse. We kind of work together here but everybody kind of knows each other. But because of your job you'll be very very sensitive to how things change. Give me a sense of that now. Where parts of the community, people here are relative to where they were six months ago or a year ago. Okay, so people have always struggled here. It's getting worse and has got worse in the last six months. Because a lot of people are very fixed incomes and life has just become very expensive. So everybody is like holding the breath for October. It's just a real sense of people are panicking. And we're all trying to kind of rally together here to think well what can we actually do. We're going to do something called warm spaces. So at least there's somewhere you can come that's warm. And just to see people and not just be sat freezing at home. I mean thank God you're doing it but at the same time what does it say. That you're having to lay on places so people can keep warm. We live in one of the richest economies in the world. We shouldn't have to do this. What I've seen the way deprivation has just got worse. And the gap has got wider and wider and wider year on year. We should not be doing this. There should be no need for any of this. Are you allowed to talk politics? I always talk politics. Jesus is very political. He was profoundly political. Had a lot to say. But Liz Trussay is not speaking that language. I will turn up at the NEC later and I will hear her make the case for tax cuts. Now very very few people who live in this community would benefit, correct me if I'm wrong. Yeah tax cuts will make no difference for a lot of our estate. There will for some people because a lot of people work here. But you won't touch it because the people that have the least are not earning enough to pay tax. Can you be a conservative Christian authentically? Well there are lots of conservative Christians. There are. There are. Take of Rhys Mark is a very devout Christian. Yeah I've reflected on that many times. Yeah his understanding of Jesus is different to mine. But you're a Church of England maker. Yeah I am. They used to say the Church of England was the Tory party at prayer as you probably know. Yeah. Most clergy are quite left wing actually. More so than their congregations often. But I mean not here. Yeah I don't think I'd ever be described as an establishment vicar. No you don't. Sitting next to Fiona was Dean who was at the meal for the first time. Well I'll ask you what I've asked everybody else. How is life at the minute for you? It's all right at the minute. It's not too bad. But I do find it a struggle. Because I have been in your children's home all my life and when I've come out I've been on benefit. And I haven't had a proper job. And with the way things are at the moment I do find it an uphill struggle. What things are you noticing being difficult money wise? Electric and gas. And in the autumn and the winter are you going to be okay? I will say this. You know all this money the government has given I am getting it. But all I know is I've got to put my electric up to £30 a month. I try that a lot when you know you haven't got much. Sure. Because you need benefit. I mean benefits is what pays for you to just about keep going. That's all I'm on. I'm not I ain't got a proper job. Right. I have to go out into like Iceland and I have to buy like pound stuff. I can't go out and buy you know like these people they just go out and shop. Put the card on the thing and to tell you the truth when I'm out I look at people in restaurants. And I look at them and I think blimey you know they're sitting in these restaurants that have been a meal. And we're going through all this. And they don't seem to care. They don't seem to bother. You don't matter to them. Do you follow politics much? Well I do. I'm not sure that the next government that we have which I'm almost 100% certain it's going to be least trust. I don't think she's going to do a lot really. What do you want from her? Well I'd like more money. A lot more. She said I mean the word she's used to that she said I don't want to give people handouts. But she's done some eating give us a fat lot did she? I don't know least trust all that well. And I've been saying to people is she up for the challenge? Can she actually do it? Because it's going to be a big job for her when she goes you know it's not just a few things writing down. She's going to have a lot to do you know. And if in two years time Keir Starmer won an election the Labour Party got in do you think life had changed then? I think it might but. Can I ask you a slightly rude question? How much do you have to live on a month? It's about 140 something. Well that's what's left after your bills are paid. Yeah gas, electric, water, TV. It's not a lot but you have to manage. You just get what the government give you to live on. It's not a lot is it really? Right we've got to go and see Liz trust now. Wish us luck. Thank you very much man. It was lovely talking to you. Thanks so much. Yeah they really get to you those conversations. Because you sort of need to have them to bring to people's attention the reality of it. Because that's the problem with that term cost of living crisis is it becomes sort of abstract and it loses its meaning. But the meaning of it is that all the prices are going up. And the fellow we spoke to in there who's obviously had a pretty hard life. I mean he's brought up in care and all that. And he wants he's paid his bills and he's got 140 quid to live on which is less than a five day. And this is wild prices going through the roof. That's the reality of it. And he knows and the interesting thing is as well. People are aware of it aren't they? People have heard the talk of tax cuts being the answer to that. And knowing full well that just has no relevance to them. And they feel completely ignored. The other danger with cost of living crisis though is it's just suddenly arrived because of the war in Ukraine and the effects of the pandemic and all. This is a long story largely about what 12 years of conservative government has meant. So in that sense you know. Us just rocking up as if this only started yesterday. I mean obviously we know it hadn't. That's not it. We're really reaping something that's been sold for years here. We're not conservative. No we're just making that clear. I collect them. Got a list. T-shirt. Look at that. T equals low tax. It's the Socialist Workers Party. They always come. It's just all. It's like an English garden of fate you know. It's nothing without myrrhizdancers. But the same token the Socialist Workers Party always have to come. Great English tradition. Polls of Tory members would have you believe that Listeras is certain to win. But there was a fair chunk of noisy support inside the Rishi Sunak and some undecided voters too. We found two women, Debbie and Jane, who were still on the fence. Can we just ask you a couple of quick questions? What's at stake in this leadership election? What's in the choice between the two candidates from your perspective? There's not a lot in between them really. Personality wise I prefer Listeras. Policy wise I'm slightly going over to Rishi. So it's balancing the two really. And what do you want to hear tonight? Sort of issues wise or poll of... That's the Listeras cheer we should make. What do you want to hear him talk about? Everything really. I need to know a lot more information before I make a complete decision. Listeras has a lot of state. So you haven't voted yet? No, no, no. I'm still undecided. This is the Listeras role we can hear about. Oh is that her? There she is. What do you think the government, whoever's in charge of it, should do about the cost of living crisis? It's a really difficult one. There's not a proper answer. So they need to do something on energy bills. Not just for us but also for businesses because I do worry about businesses. I do think that the government can't be expected to bail everybody out of every situation. If you're having to choose between heating and eating and you're having a terrible struggle... It's all about heating and eating. As a child I live in a house with no heating. I'm not saying that's how it should be. But when they say it's heating or eating I don't think it's a little bit exaggerated. I've had lots and lots of people who are in a terrible predicament. Well I'm not saying they shouldn't be here. I'm not saying that at all. But I'm just saying I never had heating as a child and here I am now I suppose. But you can eat presumably. I could eat but you're saying heating or eating. Well it tends to imply that both things are difficult. Yeah, if you think it's a matter of course that's what I'm saying. It's quite unrealistic really. What do you think people want to be looked after more than is possible you mean? Sometimes times are harder though. They expect to keep the standard of living that they've already got. Yeah but I was at a church this afternoon in the Northfield part of Birmingham and they're having to lay on through the winter warm spaces for people who can't afford to eat their home. I do understand that and that is horrendous. Those are the people that should be helping. I'm not saying they shouldn't help them. Okay but you're still on anyway in conclusion you're still on the side. We want to listen to what they've got to say. No I can say they'll probably go into all this talk. But I do prefer some of Rishi's policies. So I think she's a little bit... So this is quite an important two hours for two. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Alright, good luck. Thank you very much. Sutton Caulfield is a constituency in the West Midlands region and its MP Andrew Mitchell is a prominent backer of Rishi Sunak. Just before he introduced him on the main stage, we spotted Mitchell outside before you. So you're a Sunak backer? Yes. A self-styled underdog? Yes, I was a Jeremy Hunt backer. Were you? You liked losing. I was the underdog's underdog. Yeah. What's at stake in this election? I can't remember in the 35 years since I was first elected to Parliament a more daunting agenda and workload for the incoming Prime Minister. Yeah. I mean it's almost as if all the problems of the last 50 years which we've dealt with by decade are now being dumped on the table to deal with now. And what you do about inflation particularly and the hike in energy costs, these are going to be the determinants of whether there's an enormous amount of misery in our society quite apart from whether the Tories win the next election. On the misery question, the very direct effects of energy, price, acts and inflation on people who are really struggling, what should the eight or the Tory government do? Well, there's great merit in tax cuts but not if you're trying to deal with the energy crisis. No, they don't touch those people. Exactly. Where you've got to try and make sure that you get help to the people who are most vulnerable to these massive, massive rises and you can't really do that without using the benefit system. But you know as well as I do that there is a large part of the Conservatives' collective soul that when anybody talks about putting up benefits even temporarily, they recoil. They don't like it. No, we are a decent party of humane, warm-hearted people and we care very much about the least well-offened society and that is why under this government since 2010, you've seen a very big rise in benefits and a big rise in targeted benefits. Are you kidding me? We've had four-year benefits for these under George Osborne. All those changes to disability benefit. We've, on disability benefit, we've very specifically defended disability benefit from the austerity difficulties of the early years. You don't think we're partly in this mess of people being in this fragile position as they are, millions of them, because of what happened under the last 12 years of Conservative government. So that's part of the explanation. No, I don't think that. That benefits haven't kept pace with inflation. Well, we saw an extraordinary effort led by Rishi Sunak when Covid struck. Oh sure, just then, but going back. If I may complete my answer to your question. We saw an extraordinary effort to protect people, protect businesses, protect families. The £20 uplift on universal credit very specifically to help people during those difficult times. And what you saw with Rishi Sunak was someone who understands absolutely how these things affect the least well off and took direct action to stop it. OK. Do you worry, therefore, about what a list-trust prime ministership would mean? I mean, Lucy Sunak's talked in terms of moral failure and so on, using quite strong language. Well, I think both candidates are absolutely brilliant, as I will say tonight when I introduce Rishi. I do think that this is a test for the Tory party on whether or not we are a one nation party that reaches across the whole of society. Conservative party and Conservative government will be judged by the way in which they put their arms around society and protect the least well off. Well, a very good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Inside the arena, Conservative Party members from the region watch Rishi Sunak and list-trust being interviewed by the host, John Peena, making their speeches and giving their answers to a handful of questions asked from the floor. The significance of this event, as if you need it, reminded you are not just, in the course of these remaining two weeks of the campaign, choosing your party leader, you're choosing our prime minister. Feels like we're sort of several light years away from the fellow we met at the Food Center. The food cycle project, we're in a completely different universe here and that's intentional, right? So it almost seems, therefore, it seems inappropriate to raise that here. The world we're in is the world of global Britain and tax cuts and all will be well. It's not the world of I have to feed myself, get around and whatever else on five quid a day. That's what I don't like about it. It shuts the world out. I consistently delivered when I said I would and I love our country. I want the best for us all and I'm a person to do a part. Please welcome Liz Truss. I'm a Conservative. I believe in low taxes. I believe in companies succeeding. I believe in companies making profits, that they are able to hire new workers and bring in investment. And that is what I believe and that's the platform I'm standing on. Sit back and dismiss them, but if there's one thing I know to be true, it's that Britain loves an underdog. Please welcome Rishi Sunak. What I will not do is pursue policies that risk making inflation worse and lasting far longer, especially if those policies amount to borrowing 50 billion pounds and putting it on the country's credit card and then asking our kids and our grandkids to pick up the tab because that is not right. Right. Right. So we've just watched. Two hours. Two hours. Who did you think did the best? If you came to this, not knowing anything about this contest, you would think that by rights that Rishi Sunak was streets ahead. It's just a more impressive performer. I totally agree. And I think that's a real sense of sort of urgency and clarity. Now that's leaving aside the fact that there are lots of his arguments don't stack up and all that. But just in front of an audience like that, he sort of excelled compared to this choice. He, by comparison, seemed sort of vague and hesitant and all that. But, you know, this is politics and performances in hustings don't count for much. Rishi Sunak's goose, arguably, was cooked when he resigned from the cabinet and commenced the fall of Boris Johnson. But what I don't get is, yeah, I found, I found Liz Trussberry wooden. She sort of said the same things again and again. Even though I don't think his solutions would add up to any kind of really convincing answer to the struggles that people are going to go through, at least he tries to give a sense that he understands the gravity of the situation and the awfulness of people's predicament and that it requires dedicated, helpful government. In other words, payments you have to make to people. You don't hear any of that really from Liz Truss. You could argue she's playing her cards close to her chest or whatever, but it still seems really sort of discordant and weird. But you know what, before we went in, we spoke to two women who were waiting for them to come out. They said that they were unsure about who they were going to vote for. They liked Rishi's policies, but they preferred Liz. I'm really interested to see whether they stick with that now, because I can't believe how slicker and more cross his brief Rishi scene than Liz. I'd be surprised if they're backing Liz. We are really, really curious about the verdict that you may or may not have come to. Awwww! They both came over a lot better than both of us. Well, I'll tell you what I think, and I'm not a Conservative Party member or a Conservative, but I thought Rishi Sunak was much more convincing. Am I? Am I to be fair? Better on detail. That's exactly the same I said to Jay. Liz came at Sizela, but there wasn't much how she was going to do. It looks like he's going to lose by some margin, right? And yet he performed by far the best. Because of what he did to Boris, that's how stupid people are. Does that count against him as far as you're looking at him? No, not for me. Just to me. I can never think. I'm going. I'm going. Thank you very much. It's lovely to talk to you. Thank you. Well, I take two pretty clear conclusions from that, really. One is that it looks like the candidate who's going to lose, it turns out, is the most convincing, credible performer. I mean, they just thought, all right, if you took anybody who knew nothing about this contest into that room for those two hours, they would have thought that by rights he should be the front-runner. I mean, I'm a great admirer of all of his arguments that come up, because they don't, right? But he seems to have more of the right stuff. And one way that he has got more of the right stuff is, he at least seems to acknowledge the gravity of this social emergency. I don't think he understands, I mean, clearly he doesn't understand that it's systemic or that a lot of it's down to 12 years of Tory government. But he understands the severity of it, and I didn't get that sense from her at all. She just struck me as really as somebody who's had the same solutions in their head for 10 or 15 years, and they think they still apply to the world, even though the world clearly is hugely changed and societies are such a mess. So on both counts, soon acts stronger, but politics is a messed up thing, and he's going to lose. Cheer up, Britain. Things can only get worse. This is The Guardian.