 This is The Guardian. Hello, I'm Joni Greve in for Jonathan Friedland. And I just want to bring you a teaser of what we discussed on this week's Politics Weekly America. It's all about why some Republicans are flirting with QAnon conspiracy theories. To discuss all of this, I spoke to Alex Kaplan. He's a senior researcher at the left-leaning nonprofit organization Media Matters. He focuses mainly on social media misinformation and disinformation and online extremism. Alex, as I said earlier, we've actually talked about QAnon on this podcast before as it relates to individuals like Marjorie Taylor Greene, but also its role on what happened on January 6, 2021, when a mob of Trump supporters staged an attempted insurrection on the Capitol. The January 6 committee is still working to find out exactly what happened that day. But what do we know about QAnon's influence on the January 6 attack so far? The QAnon community played a significant role spreading false voter fraud claims after the 2020 election. Besides the fact that there were multiple QAnon supporters that were participated in the insurrection. So they played a significant role. There was a group of figures that were inflaming Trump's voter fraud grievances that were meeting with Trump, acting kind of on his behalf that were influenced by QAnon. They had heavily heavy QAnon ties. So Sidney Powell, Michael Flynn, Patrick Byrne, but Sidney Powell, she was citing QAnon figures. Morning, Sidney Powell, one of the lawyers who pushed false election fraud claims for former President Trump, is now moving to dismiss the $1.3 billion defamation lawsuit against her from Dominion Voting System. Citing QAnon claims in her lawsuits, Michael Flynn had taken a QAnon oath. Former U.S. Army Lieutenant General and former national security adviser appearing to endorse a military coup here in the United States. Trump won. So these people were like influenced heavily by QAnon and they were basically trying to help Trump with his efforts to overturn the 2020 election. As Judge Jackson's hearings were unfolding, there was also another story that we were learning more about involving another Supreme Court Justice, Clarence Thomas, and specifically his wife, Ginny. The January 6th Select Committee has obtained more than two dozen text messages between President Trump's former chief of staff, Mark Meadows, and Ginny Thomas, the wife of Supreme Court Justice, Clarence Thomas. Ginny Thomas is a conservative political activist and she had an in-depth text exchange with Donald Trump's former chief of staff, Mark Meadows, after the 2020 election. In those texts, Ginny Thomas seems to really latch onto this idea that Biden and the Democrats stole the election, speculating that, quote, we are living through what feels like the end of America and, quote, the end of liberty. So what did you make of this story? I know Ginny Thomas had, you know, was a conservative activist and had pushed some claims in the past. I was not aware of her directly invoking, I would say, QAnon stuff before, but she did claim stuff about like, you know, Democrats maybe going to Guantanamo. That sounds QAnon-ish. And then she, one particular thing, it would really, it would stood out to me also among that is that she pushed a conspiracy theory about watermark ballots. That is a QAnon conspiracy theory that was literally based on a cute post about like watching the water and that conspiracy theories which took off after the 2020 election, claiming that, you know, it was like an effort to catch voter fraud during using fake ballots and watermarks. What's notable is that is that conspiracy theories actually really had legs. So Sidney Powell cited it in her lawsuits. It was it was actually indulged in that supposed Arizona audit that happened last year. They were using UV lights to look on the for the ballots for the supposed watermark There has been an effort now nationally led by Mark Fincham, a Arizona secretary of state candidate who has pushed the watermark ballot claim to like secure ballots and kind of deal with this supposed issue around the country. And now you were seeing it invoked by the wife of Supreme Court Justice being pushed to Mark Meadows, who was then Trump's chief of staff. To listen to the rest of this episode, search for Politics Weekly America. On Apple, Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts.