 This is The Guardian. For many people, getting over the initial infection is just the start of their COVID journey. I've got chest pain. I'm struggling to breathe right now. Excruciating headaches, tinnitus. Legs feel like laid. I can't concentrate. I still can't go to work. I don't see my friends. I don't see my family. I am totally, totally beat. It's just horrific. It really is. It's awful. It may not have an official definition yet, but those who are still ill or become ill four weeks after first catching COVID-19 are said to have long COVID. More than two million people in England may have suffered some long-lasting symptoms after having coronavirus. A new study has concluded. Having questioned over half a million adults, the React2 research study found that over a third of the people who'd had the virus said they'd had symptoms which lasted for at least 12 weeks. Some experience many months of debilitating symptoms, ranging from brain fog, breathlessness and severe fatigue, to chest pains, nausea, tinnitus and depression. It was so bad I thought I was having a heart attack. I can't write. I tried to write a wedding anniversary card to my husband. It took me about 40 minutes. Others might find their symptoms come and go in waves or that new ones suddenly come on out of nowhere. And in your questionnaire, you also talked about fatigue, palpitations, muscle aches, joint aches, tummy pain, diarrhea and... I think I did everything. Since 2020, researchers and patient advocates have been hard at work trying to unravel exactly what it is that long-Covid patients are suffering from, whether there are multiple different disorders at play and why some people have ongoing symptoms while others don't. 40 to 60-year-old women were most likely to have severe long-Covid symptoms, but when it comes to memory and thinking problems, older men were more likely to have severe symptoms. Older men were more likely to get this brain fog and the other symptoms not so much. So, with Covid cases still high in many countries around the world and millions already struggling with long-Covid, what do we know about the condition? And are we getting any closer to treatments and therapies? From The Guardian, I'm Ian Sample and this is Science Weekly. How do you get your eye on Covid? How do you get your eye on Covid? How do you get your eye on Covid? To get some insight into what we do and don't know so far about long-Covid, I spoke to a Kiko Iwasaki, Professor of Immunobiology at the Yale School of Medicine. We're now into the third year of the pandemic and it seems we've learned a huge amount about the virus, but we're still getting to grips with long-Covid. Is any consensus emerging on the cause or causes of long-Covid? I wouldn't say there's a consensus yet. One of the possibilities is persistent virus infection or it could be just remnants of virus such as RNA or protein that is persistently present somewhere in the tissue and that's causing chronic inflammation and leading to long-Covid. There are other hypotheses such as autoimmune disease that's triggered by the virus. That's leading to long-term consequences because once these autoimmune cells are triggered, they tend to persist for a long time. There are many others including tissue damage that's unable to be repaired. This biosis of microbiome, which means that bacteria that live in the gut or other places are disturbed by the infection. Is there thinking that some or even all of these might be contributing to long-Covid? In a given patient, you may have actually several processes going on at once. Absolutely. These are not mutually exclusive possibilities and in fact, as you say, I think they may be going on either all at once or in sequence. One may be triggering the others and so on. Are these kinds of ongoing problems unique to Covid or is Covid really shining a light on the broad issue of post-viral syndromes? It's really the latter. There are many, many other viruses and bacteria and parasites that can lead to similar types of prolonged symptoms and some of them may be for years or decades depending on which pathogens. But because there are so many people getting Covid and therefore long-Covid, we are now shining light on these other post-acute infection syndromes. You've been looking at how people with long Covid fare after they've had a vaccination. Tell us about that work. What sort of things have you been finding out? The original start of this research really began by me looking at some Twitter posts from patients who are reporting improvement in their long Covid symptom after getting their vaccines. And initially patient-led groups reported that between 40 to 60% of the patients experienced some improvement in their symptoms after vaccination. One of the most simplest explanations is that the vaccines induce robust antibody and T-cell immune responses that might clear the persistent virus or remnants of virus and are getting rid of this source of chronic inflammation. The other hypothesis also may be consistent such as autoimmune disease. Vaccine may trigger some other immune responses that deviate these auto-reactive cells from attacking the host cells at least for some time period. So essentially the vaccine might either be helping to clear any remaining viral particles or stopping those so-called auto-reactive immune cells mistakenly attacking our own cells or maybe both. So how have you begun to investigate this effect? So we began to look at this link by studying long Covid patients prior to getting vaccine and post-vaccination to see what changes are being made in the immune responses and which of those correlate with the symptom improvement so we can mimic this in the rest of the population. And do you find that the vaccine is producing certain effects in the immune system which you can then tie through to perhaps an improvement in certain conditions, in certain symptoms? That's exactly the goal, is to try to understand if there are some factors that the immune system releases or immune system engages that leads to symptom improvement. It may not be all symptoms but if there are certain symptoms that are improved by certain factors can we emulate that using therapy or other types of treatments for long Covid patients? Do you think that work you've been talking about, Akiko, might shed some light on the mechanisms behind long Covid or at least some of what's going on there? That is really our hope, to understand what's driving long Covid so that we can design a proper therapy to treat patients with long Covid. Now because, as I mentioned, there may be multiple different causes of long Covid we need a biomarker to try to understand what kinds of drivers are present in which patients. For instance, if it is the persistent virus that's driving long Covid in a subset of patients we could think about giving them antivirals or monoclonal antibodies. On the other hand, if a person is now suffering from autoimmunity then we should be suppressing their auto-reactive immune cells as opposed to trying to fight the virus itself. There was some recent work from University Hospital Zurich that found lower levels of certain antibodies in people with long Covid. How does that fit into the broader picture of our understanding of long Covid? So there are several emerging studies that are showing immune deviation in long Covid patients, including perhaps lower antibody levels. And so that would suggest that the immune response in the long Covid patients weren't strong enough to potentially remove all the viruses from their body and may promote a persistent virus infection or at least remnants of the virus to persist. Kika, I wanted to ask you about how things are looking in the sort of months and so on ahead which I know is probably sort of crystal ball gazing but we've had the Omicron variant and it's fueled these huge waves of infection in many countries, the UK included. And it's prompted concerns that we're going to see a lot of long Covid off the back of that. But on the counterpoint is that this wave of Omicron has been milder in many cases probably because we have so much background immunity. What are your thoughts on this? Is the concern about a lot of long Covid following this Omicron wave justified? I believe it's justified. It's too early to tell what percentage of people who got Omicron variant will develop long Covid. But I suspect it will be similar to the other variants and the ancestral strain of SARS-CoV-2 that lead to long Covid. There's nothing to suggest that we will be spared from getting long Covid if you get the Omicron variant, especially if you're not vaccinated. So on the one hand, you do have this pre-existing immunity building with vaccinations and prior exposure. However, that is not a guarantee to prevent long Covid altogether. And even without that, we already have existing millions of people having long Covid around the world. So on top of it, I'm afraid that the Omicron infection will add to that number quite drastically. And just finally, given that potential for a lot more long Covid, are there any treatments or therapies on the horizon that you think already look promising? I wish I could say there are. But until we understand the deep immunological or molecular mechanism of disease, and until we understand who's suffering from what kind of long Covid, I'm not sure if there's a one drug that can cure all long Covid patients. So for the time being, perhaps the vaccines are our best bet on this. Yes, vaccines are our best bet because even if we are to get breakthrough infections, there are reports showing that vaccination and booster with vaccination significantly reduce the risk for getting the long Covid. And there's also even a report showing, it's a preprint, but studies showing that people who have gotten the infection, as long as they get the vaccine shortly after the infection within the first four to 12 weeks, their risk for developing long Covid also reduces. So vaccine is absolutely the way to prevent and potentially even to therapeutically prevent the development of long Covid. Nikiko, huge thanks for coming on and explaining all of this to us. Thank you very much for having me. Thanks again to a Kiko Iwasaki. You can find a link to all our reporting on long Covid on the podcast web page at theguardian.com. Now, usually I'd say we'll see you next week and we will. But there's going to be a special episode going out on the Science Weekly feed this Saturday of our new Guardian podcast, Weekend. Weekend will give you the very best celebrity interviews, lifestyle features and opinion columns from the week, all read by talented narrators. So look out for that on Saturday and we'll be returning as ever next week. See you then. This is the Guardian.