 The Guardian Hi, producer Madeline here. A few months into the pandemic, it began to emerge that many people who caught COVID-19 lost their sense of smell, and often vary suddenly. For others, taste also disappeared. Now, studies have shown that, thankfully, the majority recover both senses to some degree within weeks, yet there is an unfortunate group whose regained taste and smell are distorted, with odours and flavours perceived as different or unpleasant. Another set of sufferers lose their sense of taste and remain anosmic for months on end. Whilst researchers study the mechanisms behind the loss of taste and smell, and treatments that might help people to build their senses back up again, here on the podcast we wanted to return to an episode broadcast in 2016, exploring what it's actually like to live without smell. The episode was part of a special series from The Guardian called Brain Waves, exploring the science and emotion of our everyday lives. Before I leave you to dive in, if you'd like to get in touch with us, do email scienceweekly at the guardian.com. We'll be back on Tuesday with our usual coverage. See you then, and enjoy the episode. Now, now, Natalie, there must be something, the smell of which, or the taste of which, reminds you of some deep-seated memory. Yeah, there's one in particular, tocino di cielo, which is a classically gibleterian dish, which is actually translatable as heavenly pink, and it's basically sort of egg-type dessert that you get. And I remember my great aunt used to make it for us all the time during the summertime, so we used to go visit. And I had it a couple of years ago after she'd passed away, and it was just this wonderful reminiscence of being back in her kitchen and helping her make it when I was little. Yeah, how about you? So, there's a very specific smell that I remember from my time working in the buildings at NASA, and it didn't matter which building you were in or which field centre, so whether you were at Cape Canaveral in Florida or whether you were in Houston, they all smell the same. I'm not sure whether it was the air conditioning or whether it was the thing they used to clean the halls, but I've just got that sense of these cold corridors. There's a really characteristic sort of sweet smell, and it instantly calls into mind all of those locations. So, yeah, I think that's something everyone can relate to, really, that really hard link between memories and things that you smell, things that you taste, and that's something that this guy knows all about. It's interesting because this is what we call the Proust phenomenon, since the famous description that Proust gave of his character Marcel. I'm Barry Smith, I'm from the Centre for the Study of the Senses at the University of London, and that's where we look at all the ways that our sensory information provides us with knowledge of the world around us and ourselves. Slowly and suddenly, he thinks, ah, that was an enormously powerful experience I just had, and he has to figure out what it is, but the Proust phenomenon for the rest of us seems to be that immediate recognition, and that means that smells seem to encapsulate particular episodes of our past, and we didn't even know that we had laid down those memories. I think that's why we're surprised and delighted when we suddenly re-experienced something from the past. We didn't know it was in there, and it may be that those episodic smell-triggered memories are more reliable simply because they don't get interfered with, so they may have been put away and locked away in their little memory capsule, and then when we open them, there's a kind of time travel that smell gives you that's very unlike some of the other senses. So I've always thought it must be a very effective revision method to sort of sit there with various smelling salts as you're going through your books and then just break them out on your desk during the exam. I'm sure that would work really well. You know, I tried that. It seemed to be quite effective, and there was some really interesting research that came out around the smell of pathomin. Did you just say you tried that? Yeah, but with pathomin oils, rheumatropyls, my psych to go. In your exam? Yeah. Yeah, I don't know. I'd read about it, about how if you're in a specific state or you learn in a particular context and you have a cue that you then associate with a stimulus, when you bring the cue back, you can end up with a stronger recollection of the stimulus that you were trying to remember. Yeah, but it's definitely a phenomenon, that link, that very hard link between smell and memory, but what has this got to do with emotion? Well, there's some really interesting research that's looked at the complexity of emotion and memory and how it can be triggered, like we just heard, by a simple sensory cue. And the thinking is, in current scientific research, that this is probably due to brain anatomy. So incoming smells tend to be processed by the olfactory bulb, which starts right inside your nose and then runs along the bottom of your brain. And this has direct connections to two key brain areas that are strongly implicated in both emotion and memory. So you've got the amygdala and the hippocampus. And what's really curious is that the visual, auditory and tactile information don't actually pass through these brain areas. So it's thought that when you experience a smell, it kind of bypasses these intermediate brain areas and gives you a much more direct experience of something, which makes it more easily accessible. So it's almost the only bit of a neuroanesthema I know of olfactory bulb as a forward projection of the brain. I don't think I really appreciated how closely it was connected to those areas that are so tightly coupled to emotion. And of course, taste and smell are very tightly coupled. And we're aware that when we have a cold, food doesn't taste right. But that's not the only coupling, is it, Natalie? So there's been some really interesting research done also predominantly by certain chefs, including Heston Blumenthal, looking at all of the different factors that contribute to our experience of taste. And I'd love to read a quick quote. And he said, Eating is the only thing we do that involves all the senses. I don't think that we realize just how much influence the senses actually have on the way that we process information from mouth to brain. And what's fascinating when we take that quote and we look at the different research that's being done around these factors that influence our experience of taste, you find that things like sound, color, your environment, all of these things can actually heavily influence our experience. So to sort of maybe suggest that there's some kind of form of synesthesia that happens for all of us, which blends all of these different elements to give us an overwhelming sensation of what we call taste. So for instance, you might find that sound, the crispiness of crisps, contributes to your experience of them being fresh. Or for instance, in a specific environment, whether it's the packaging of a food or the name and label or the way in which it's served. For instance, if you're listening to the sound of sizzling bacon, does it make bacon and egg ice cream served in the fat duct taste more like bacon and eggs? Yes, the evidence suggests that we can heavily be influenced by all of these different factors. And so I think it's quite easy to accept that our experience of the world and so our emotions are sort of multi-sensory. They involve everything in our sense of taste, our sense of smell, the way things feel and look. But what happens if you're missing one of those senses? And we're about to hear from someone who knows exactly what that's like. This is Lucy Mangan, a journalist here at The Guardian who was born without the ability to smell. We sent her to multi-sensory chef Joseph Yousuf at Kitchen Theory to test the limits of her taste. Now, I'm a bit worried because you're an incredibly talented chef and to your sort of molecular gastronomy degree, and you're about to give me this taste test and I am going to be so lacking, it's going to be embarrassing. But let's give it a go. That's weird. Well, that must be the moment because it's like nothing else. That's too many balls of chalk. That's got to be bitter. Indeed. Oh, that's pure evil. That looks like salt. It is salt. There we go. This one's a lovely brown colour. And that's sugar. At last. Good. Well, we got there in the end. Always good to end on a sweet note. So one thing that we can see from this is that you can obviously distinguish between all the five basic tastes. And I think this is really important for people to understand the difference between being able to perceive flavour, which you struggle with, I believe, and being able to distinguish and associate and articulate tastes in a dish that you're eating. Well, that bit of meringue was like popping candy, space dust. I'm getting a Proustian rush. That's amazing. Have you put popping candy in? Yeah. Have you? Yeah. Oh, brilliant. Oh, my God. There's something to bring it to life, especially when it's very intensified in your head and you get the popping candy. All of a sudden, it adds layer upon layer of dimension to what you're eating. It's mental. That one's mental, huh? There is this emotional component to food that I think I'm missing. When I... A few times I serve a meal to people. I'm so glad just to get it on the table. I never think that people might have been looking forward to it or hoping for something really nice. I'm just glad they're good. That's all I got. I'm like, oh, yes, fuel time. Of course, for my poor guests, it's a bigger deal and a bigger disappointment. Fine. How do you find that impact when you're, let's say, in social situations of having a drink, having a glass of wine, for instance? I don't drink wine unless it's fizzy because it tastes like... But, yeah, I suppose what I mean is, if we didn't have to have food for, obviously, living purposes, I wouldn't miss it. It'd be very nice just to be able to pop a pill. Do it that way. But if going along to kind of multi-sensory kind of dining events where they're... Well, like what we do at Kitchen Theory, really try and engage all your senses, surely that would be something like some of the little elements you saw on the dishes here that would maybe kind of bring out a bit more enjoyment in it? Yeah, anything that's broadening the experience that, for me, is so limited... Yeah. It's good, yeah. It was never let me cook for you. I go by colours. It's quite fascinating to hear Lucy talk about her experience there. I mean, it's not that she can't taste anything, but there is a massive missing emotional component for her. And, you know, I was most struck by her saying, well, you know, if you didn't need to live, I wouldn't miss it. It's not a big deal because you just take for granted that everyone at some level or another can enjoy a meal. And yet it doesn't sound like she does at all, simply because she's missing that fundamental sense. There seems to be a lack of enjoyment of it, which is so sad because, you know, when we sit to eat, there's the sensuality of the thing, of actually enjoying the food that we're putting in our mouths, and then also the social aspect of wanting to sit with people. And I was struck by how she said that she was just tasked with the whole thing of getting the food on the table as fuel for her guests, as opposed to being able to drive any pleasure from it. But what's really interesting is when she mentioned about how emotions were seemingly lacking for her and how that can play into our experience of nostalgic food, nostalgic memories of the way that things taste, if we start to look into memory as the process of perhaps maintaining information over time or drawing on our past experiences in order to help create meaning for the present, if you're losing that whole element of food, what is it that's actually lost? I mean, do you actually lose some part of your emotional range somehow? But they're all intertwined, aren't they, these systems? And that's the thing, it's very hard to separate them out. Why should they be so intertwined? Why are they all intertwined? Well, to explain it in a little bit more depth, here's Professor Edvard Moser from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Yes. Yes, I hear you very well. Hello. First of all, the taste and the smell systems of the brain have quite strong connections right into the memory systems. Actually, they are located on different sides of the brain, so the smells come in on the front side, and much of the memory system is actually on the far back, in the temporal lobes on the sides and back. But despite this long distance, there are quite powerful connections. We do most of our work in rodents, and they are really strong, so even direct connections. When we experience odors or tastes, and they are unique, and we experience them in a context when, for example, when we eat good food, or we have fun together with people, that's a unique connection. And just the fact that there are unique connections between experiences, regardless of what they are, whether they are odors or whether it's something else, and a memory that is enough by itself to actually make it quite strong. You could, for example, compare it with a piece of music, let's say from your childhood, that whenever you saw your grandmom, then she was singing a certain song. And when you then hear that song later in your life, it will also remind you of your grandmother. So I think it's important to say it's not only taste and smells, there are many other pathways into memories. So it's not just smell, but it does seem that that, of all the senses, is really closely connected to both memory and emotion, and I do wonder why that is. It has been suggested that smell is the oldest sense, as it has its origins in the rudimentary senses for chemicals in air and in water, and even bacteria have this kind of sense, although we might not necessarily call it smell. And what's interesting when we look at smell compared to the other senses, such as sight, which has four kinds of light senses, or for heat and cold and pain and pressure in our skin and in our muscles. But when we look at smell, there are well over a thousand different receptor types, which actually regenerate throughout our lifetimes and change according to our environment and what we're used to smelling. And so it creates this extraordinary complexity that enables us to discriminate many different kinds of smell, even if they're quite similar to one another, depending on where we were and who we were with at the time when we first smelled them. It's interesting because I was trying to think of something from another sensory modality other than smell that triggers such a profound emotion or memory. And the closest I could get off the top of my head was this experience I've had in my medical practice. When you have people who've been injured in accidents and perhaps have broken a rib and it's punctured their lung, the air can leak out of the lung and into the tissues overlying it. And that produces something called surgical emphysema, so which is air escaping into the tissues. And when you examine the chest and you get your hand on it, they say that it feels like sort of biological bubble wrap. And that is a really good description. That's what it feels like. But it's different because it's this sort of thing, this clammy chest with this sort of spongy feel. And that for me does evoke both the emotion of dread because you know they've had a bad injury after that and this sort of memory of all these cases in which you felt that. But it's hard really to find other senses that do that for you, whereas for smell, it's very unitary experience, isn't it? We both have examples of very specific smells, which we attach very specific emotions. And yet that's not true really of the other sensory modalities. And they've done quite a lot of work on this connection between smell and memory. And that is something that with scientific research we've been able to see firsthand. Rats have a very well-developed outer system. And at the same time, they have a memory system that is not too different from the ones we have. So we trained rats in a task where they had to distinguish between different odours, for example, banana odour, pine odour. And what the rats learnt was that whenever there was a banana odour then they had to go to a food cup that was on the left side in a box. And when there was a pine odour, they had to go to the right side. And then we did similar for other types of odours. So they really associated each odour with a certain food well where they had to go to get the reward. Once they learnt this, then we recorded activity from their brain using very, very thin wires that picked up the signals from individual cells in an area of the brain that's called the hippocampus and one that is called the end-terrino-cordant. So they are both part of the memory system. And what they found in that study was that as the animals learnt to distinguish the odours and learnt which odour was predicted reward at which location, then the cells became more and more tuned to these odours and they started to work together in a way that they hadn't done before. So the whole network of cells became sort of tuned and when the odour came, then you could almost, by just looking at the activity in cells in this brain area, you could tell whether the rat would actually go to the left side or to the right side because it had developed a pattern that was specific for this choice. Occasionally, these rats made errors. They went to the wrong food cup and whenever they made an error and went to the wrong cup, they should actually predict it from the activity pattern in this brain area because then the neurons were firing in a different way and you could tell now it's not going to make it because it probably doesn't manage to retrieve the memory. This research suggests then that errors of the brain that are central to our ability to form long-term memories are actually very closely coupled to our sense of smell, so that we can actually translate and connect memories in a set of signals in the head that have potentially an impact on physical locations. So what does that say about behaviour and the way that we experience life? Yes, it's an interesting piece of work, isn't it? There's that very tight coupling between our sense of smell, our memory and our behaviours to the degree at which they were able to see patterns of neuronal activation, so patterns of activation in the brain before the animal had acted and predict the actions of that animal, so predict the behaviour based upon the firing of neurons specific to the sense of smell. And that's a really intriguing connection. And if it affects you at that level, that fundamental level of behaviour and memory, then what does it do for you emotionally if you have no sense of smell for everyday experiences that we all take for granted? Let's go back to Lucy Mangan again, and this time in one of my favourite smelling places, a cafe. Shall we go crazy and have some drinks that you can't taste? Let's do that. OK. How can I get a seat? It doesn't matter. It does. What shall we have? Let's have a look. Well, let's talk through what we can see on the menu. Let's have a look at the menu. I could taste peppermint. Could I have a peppermint seat, please? It tastes like toothpaste, doesn't it? There's a feeling of it, yeah. Yeah. I would like a... Could you be me a flat white? Thank you. I'm having a touch of your name. All good. Thank you. Well, we've got quite the anosmic array here. We've got Duncan Boat, who's the founder of Fifth Sense. Am I right in thinking you, unlike me, were born with a sense of smell that you've lost yours, haven't you? Yes, that's right. I lost mine in 2005 after his results for head injury. And, Tom, you lost yours? I was... Most of it. I've always retained some sense of smell, but I was assaulted in the street when I was 19. Duncan, was yours a more straightforward injury? Um... I suffered quite a severe blow to the back of the head, falling down some stairs. But the interesting thing is, after about a year of the accident, and I sort of felt I would need to put it all behind me and move on, I don't ever think, I ever quite regained the level I was at before. And life kind of felt flat, and life never really felt the same again. And I sort of felt that... Over the years, I was aware that my experience of life had changed, and that things weren't the same as they were anymore. But by this point, because I'd basically just blocked out the whole smell-loss thing, because I thought, well, you know, don't even think about it. If nothing can be done, don't even pay attention to it. So, I just kind of... I just didn't engage with it at all. So when I did start to learn about it, it was an absolute epiphany. It allowed me to sort of reconcile the way that I felt life wasn't the same anymore, with the loss of smell, as opposed to, what did I do to myself when I smacked my head? For me, there's something about a smell being a sense of place. What does this smell like? Because that's a massive rush of information that goes in, that gives me a sense of I am here. And without that, what's it like? And I don't feel particularly connected to where I am a lot of the time, and to the experience of feeling that I'm living life. There is a feeling that something there is missing. I'd agree with that massively. This feeling of being disengaged, I first had to articulate it when Duncan set up the first Fit Sense conference and asked me to go and speak for a few minutes about the emotional impact. And it was the first time in 40 years I sat down and thought, what does it mean? And that's what the organisation meant to me. And what I came down and really boiled it down to is, when we smell the world that comes into us, and it breaks down a barrier between us and the world, but when we see the world, it stays where it is. And there's that loss of connection of this very intimate breaking down of the barrier between me and my surroundings, which had gone for me. And that really what has got me to the point of feeling that I was looking through the world at a pane of glass. I mean, he's right, isn't he? In a literal sense, when you smell something, it is part of the outside world, coming in, you're sensing molecules from that world, you know, in your old factory bulb, in that extension of your brain. And it's interesting, isn't it, how different the experience is between, say, Lucy, who's never had a sense of smell, and for Duncan and Tom, who both lost their sense of smell much later in life, she doesn't seem to miss it very much, if at all. They're actually really very mournful. It's actually quite moving, just imagining what it might be like living life without this sense that we take so often for granted in our hierarchy of senses. How often do we think about smell as being one of the fundamental things that glues us to reality, that enables us to connect with the people that we're with and the places that we are? Now we've got it. Yay! Okay, now it's recording. Gélona Croix is a psychologist at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden. If you ask people which sense you would want to lose, yeah, if you have to choose, and you want to, and you should lose one of your senses, then what people normally tell you, it's olfaction, or maybe taste. But actually, the sense of olfaction is quite important. And this is as much for connection with people and places as it is for, say, food. What we are actually able is we can smell our partner, we can smell our children, we can identify our partner and our children by the sense of olfaction. So it gives you another channel of interpersonal communication, which is normally kind of unconscious. And they've even shown this in experiments with mothers. So what we recently found out in our research is that mothers are able to identify the smell of their babies, and they really prefer the smell of their own babies compared to the smell of other babies, or through the smell of most babies is quite nice. This tells you something that the body order is kind of related to mother-child bonding, which is nice. But this preference of the own baby's order might actually help you in raising up your offspring. So kind of reducing the costs of raising up the offspring by identifying the child which actually belongs to you. You know, I think that's one certainly all parents can relate to, that smell of their children. Most of the time they don't smell very good, actually. And having a sense that's very tightly coupled to your emotional bond with your child seems to be a very sensible thing to have, and one that helps you recognize them and feel affection for them, seems to be the sort of trait that you'd expect to be selected for if you believe in that sort of evolutionary theory. But it's not just familial bonds that are mediated through our sense of smell. We actually perceive much more things by affection than we are aware of. So when you really make kind of sophisticated design, which has been done, and then ask your participants to identify, is this the order of sweat coming from sports, or is this the order of sweat coming from anxiety conditions, then people are quite good doing this. Or people are actually even good at identifying chemosignals, steaming from tears, or identifying the smell of someone who was happy. So actually, there is a huge emotional compound, but what you also seem to be able to smell is if someone is sick, if someone is drinking alcohol, so it tells you something about the physical fitness of someone, and it tells you something about the immune competence, so is someone related to you, or is someone a good, or factory spoken, is someone a good match to you. And I think all of those things coming together, physical fitness being a good match to you, some kind of emotional condition, this together creates some kind of factory attraction. So it's interesting, Professor Croy there is talking about smell as being fundamental to your relationships and the way you sense the world around you. And yet, I think I, and I think many people don't really put the sense of smell very high and the hierarchy of senses they possess. I mean, it's actually probably, if I had to rank them, it would be the lowest down on my list. I certainly don't think I've got a very good sense of smell, and I don't think it plays a huge role for me. And yet, it's probably more important, I think. But that's certainly not true of everybody else, and that's absolutely not true for other species. Other species are hugely dependent upon smell, as dependent on smell as we are, say, sight or sound. And it's interesting, because when we look at the research that's been done with other species, some have found that a specific hormone known as vasopressin can actually help animals to recognise each other through their sense of smell, and that when the hormone fails to work, certain species can no longer recognise one another. But it's not just animals that have this sort of interesting relationship with olfaction. In humans, one of the things that research has found is, for instance, when women are taking a hormone or pill so that they don't get pregnant, if they've been taking it for a while, they can end up mating up with a mate that's genetically more similar, and when they come off the pill to conceive, can end up with extreme aversion responses or disgust responses for the person that they've set up to make the rest of their life with, which, if it's true, is actually quite disturbing. So we've been building this multidimensional picture of what emotion is, and this time looking at it through the lens of the way we sense the world around us and how senses that we might even take for granted such as smell really shape that emotional experience. This episode of Brainwaves was presented by me, Natalie Nohai, and Dr Kevin Fong. The producers were Eva Kriziak and Max Sanderson. With original music by Jed Flood. For more information about The Guardian's multi-platform exploration of emotion, head over to theguardian.com and search Brainwaves.