 This is The Guardian. These days, the pharmaceutical company Pfizer is famous for one particular thing. Trials carried out by the US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer and the German manufacturer BioNTech suggest they have created a coronavirus vaccine which is more than 90% effective. But they've got another vaccine in the pipeline you probably haven't heard of. This time for Lyme disease. Some encouraging news in the fight against Lyme disease, the most common tick-borne illness. The first potential vaccine in decades is now entering its final phase of testing. Together with a company called Valneva, they're recruiting 6,000 participants across Europe and in the United States to test the efficacy and safety of the vaccine. Most of us wouldn't think twice about Lyme disease, but perhaps we should. And it comes after recent studies showed nearly 15% of the world's population has likely had the condition, including hundreds of thousands of Americans every year. Globally, rates are rising, spread by growing populations of ticks. Climate and environment changes appear to be working in the ticks' favour as well. So for those in the northern hemisphere where Lyme disease is endemic, it's likely to get worse. Over the last 20 years, researchers found the numbers have been going up and men over the age of 50 who live in rural areas are the most at risk. So what is Lyme disease? How serious can it be? And at least before we get a vaccine, what's the best way to prevent it? From The Guardian, I'm Madeline Finley and this is Science Weekly. Dr Owen Healy, you're a now retired researcher on ticks and Lyme disease from University College Cork in Ireland. And I know that when we're saying ticks, we're actually referring to this one particular species that carries a bacteria called Barelia burgdorferi that causes Lyme disease. But how does the tick actually spread this bacteria? Ticks employ an ambushing strategy when they want to attach to a host animal. The tick waits on the tips of vegetation until a potential host passes by and brushes against the vegetation and the tick very quickly latches on. And it starts to penetrate the skin using a very, very complex array of weapons, enzymes that will digest and break down the skin layer, and an anesthetic to dull the sensation so that the host may be totally unaware of being bitten. Now, once the tick penetrates the blood vessel, it starts to suck blood and it'll do that for several days. And if that tick has Barelia in its gut, then the bacteria pass into the host and so begins an infection. What are the initial symptoms that you might get? They're pretty general. They're flu-like symptoms, aches and pains, headaches, lethargy, a general feeling of being of form, not feeling the best, but nothing too serious. Without treatment, of course, other symptoms develop depending on the site of the organ that's attacked by the Barelia. It could be neuropathy, tingling of the fingers, numbness, stiffness and pain in joints and tendons, which can lead to severe arthritis. In some cases, the bacteria can affect the heart muscles causing carditis or inflammation of the heart. So it can make a person's life a misery and, of course, there's a consequent impact on the whole family of that victim as well. Hello, Dad. Hello, Madeline. Now, Dad, you're not on the podcast as one of Science Weekly's biggest fans, although I know you are, it's because you had Lyme disease. Now, before you realised that you had Lyme disease, I know that you weren't feeling well. So what were the first signs? When did you start to feel ill and what was going on? I had a rash in my leg, which was sort of target shaped, so pretty ugly to be perfectly honest, on my top of my thigh. But being a typical blocker, guess all I did was ignore it or slap a bit of sudicrimorin before it would go away. Other symptoms that I had that I didn't realise that were related to the limes, I had a really stiff neck and shoulders and I had mood changes and I didn't realise at the time, but I believe that was also due to the Lyme disease. So when did you put kind of all these little clues together? What happened to make you go to a doctor and say, well, something's going on? The rash just wasn't going away. And to cut a long story short, I was driving and there was a radio programme about Lyme's disease and about the rashes that it causes. And I thought, and I literally drove into the doctor's surgery, which was on the way home. The doctor did the usual, dropped your trousers, so I dropped my trousers and she took one look at it and went, you've got Lyme's disease. A bullseye rash like my dad had can be a clear first sign of Lyme disease. But even if you end up taking antibiotics like he did, if you haven't caught the infection quickly enough, the bacteria can still infect different parts of the body and cause lots of long-term symptoms. In the case of Borrelia, it has various evasive strategies where it can modify its form. It can develop a new set of antigens so that the immune system is confused. It could hide inside in cells so that if a victim is undergoing antibiotic treatment, it can actually evade the antibiotic. It has very clever ways of persisting within the whole stilebro so that the infection can recur at a later time. This means that even after you take antibiotics and have a period of feeling better, symptoms can return or new ones can appear, which is what happened to my dad. I was due to go to the doctors again, which I did, and I was given an ECRG, so the old rhythm test, and that really made me laugh because I was lying on the bed and I'm 5'10", and at that time I was probably nearly 14 stone, I guess. For our American listeners, that's, I'd say, average dad bod. Yeah, maybe slightly heavier than normal. The lady said, oh, that's good. She said, do you do long distance marathon running? I looked and I said, look at me. Do I look like a marathon runner? I said, why? My heart rate was 45. My normal resting heart rate is usually around 56, yeah, anyway, 56, 57. So, remember that? Yeah, I was going to say you're fit, but you're not an elite athlete. We joke now, but at the time it was scary. The impact slime disease can have long term on the heart and other organs and muscles can be very serious, no matter how fit you are. So, it's something you definitely want to avoid, but evidence suggests that cases of Lyme disease are on the rise. I asked Owen why. This is primarily because tick populations are growing in size and the ticks are also becoming more widely distributed in the environment. For tick populations to grow, they need large mammal hosts and deer are the best hosts of all. In the UK, woodland areas, percentage of land, total land area has increased from 9% in 1980 to 13% in 2019. Now, where forestry develops, deer will follow and amplification of tick numbers is almost inevitable. On top of that, we've got climate change. We've got milder winters with fewer frost nights and of course we've got higher average rainfall despite the dry summer we're having, providing more-voiced habitat for ticks to survive. On the other side of the coin, we've got a change in social behaviour towards a more outdoorsy lifestyle leading to more tick bites and increasing the incidence of Lyme disease. So, the announcement that there could be a vaccine for Lyme disease which may become available by 2025, I mean that sounds like it could be really useful in the future if tick numbers do keep going up and we are seeing an increase of Lyme disease, but I know that we did have a vaccine before so what happened with that one? Yeah, we did have a vaccine. The parent company of what's now GlaxoSmithKline, they had an anti-Lime vaccine called LimeRix which was approved by the FDA in 1998 and this vaccine had an efficacy of about 75%. Now, what followed that was a wave of anti-vaccine sentiment. Fears grew around the possibility and I stressed only the possibility of side effects from the vaccine. A class action was taken by a substantial number of people against the company and this was settled without any admission of liability. The whole anti-vaccine campaign caused sales to drop like a stone and at that point the company withdrew the vaccine, withdrew it from the market entirely. There's obvious reasons why you wouldn't want to just bring back that vaccine, but tell me a bit about this new one from Pfizer and Valneva. How does it work? So, what they're doing really is to identify one or more key surface proteins on the Borrelia that it uses to enter the host and that it uses to inhibit the host's immune system. They've identified a protein it's called OSPA and they prepare a purified version of this protein and inject it into a human. Then the human immune system then develops antibodies towards the OSPA which will target and knock it out. So, in that case if a tick infected with Borrelia should bite a vaccinated human antibodies and the human blood will be drawn into the tick's gut and should bind to the OSPA protein on the bacteria's surface and effectively kill it. This is the theory and if it works then Borrelia would never actually enter the human body at all. The bacteria would would die within the tick. And this is now going into clinical trials where it's going to be tested on volunteers which means we will have to wait a little while. So, what can people do in the meantime to avoid getting Lyme disease? Education is the root out of this problem. Both the general public and the public health authorities and practitioners really need to be better informed over ticks and Lyme and to be aware of the really serious consequences of contracting the disease. Wearing appropriate clothing, avoiding unnecessary contact with vegetation, use of tick repellent, very important a thorough examination of themselves and children on returning home from the outdoors. Of course warning signs I'm not sure about the UK but we have very very few warning signs about tick infested areas in Ireland, very few. So people wander into woodlands and national parks and so on not aware that there is disease looking everywhere. Signs aren't just needed in woodlands and forests as my dad found out. So I was on the golf course and I hit a ball into the long grass and being the tight Scotsman that I am I decided I was going to go and look for it. So I went looking for this ball and I had shorts on it was a lovely sunny day I didn't find the ball and I came back onto the fair when I played I thought oh what's that and thought there was something on my leg picked off what I thought it was. Not recommended. Not recommended and then went played with my golf went back home I thought maybe it's a little bit of a splinter or something from a bramble or something that I've got caught and then it just progressively got worse from there. Once I was diagnosed I went up to the club and told them what happened and they were very good they put up a notice. Do you think if you had seen that sign you would have been more careful going into the grass or do you think you still would have gone in trying to get your ball? I would still I would still go in looking for the golf ball. But you might have realised faster when you got the rash what had been going on. Absolutely absolutely yeah and to be honest if I knew then what I'd known now I would not have gone looking for the golf ball because yeah it's it's at the back of my mind all the time and sometimes when I wake up and I've got a stiff neck and stuff I think oh no occasionally look around and go have I got a rash. Well dad thank you so much for coming on the podcast. Mad it's been an absolute pleasure and I can take it off of one of the things I've always wanted to do so thank you very much. Thanks again to my dad David and to Dr Owen Healy. Now before you go I've got a special offer to tell you about. The Guardian is running a three-week master class about the climate crisis from the third to the 21st of October. You'll get to hear talks from academics, journalists and activists including Professor Mark Maslin and our very own Fiona Harvey and Damien Gale and the offer. Right now you can get 15% off by using the discount code back to school that's back to school all one word and this is only available until the 12th of September so head to the guardian.com forward slash climate dash masterclass to book and we've put a link to that on the podcast web page at the guardian.com and that's it for today. The producer was me Madeline Finley, the sound design was by Tony Onichuku and the executive producer was Max Sanderson. We'll be back on Tuesday. See you then. This is the Guardian.