 This is The Guardian. Earlier this year, the world's richest man, Elon Musk, decided that he wanted to buy Twitter. Now to some news. Yeah, and apparently it has happened. We know that a couple of weeks ago, Elon Musk put in an offer of almost $44 billion just to buy Twitter. And apparently we're hearing it is now a done deal. Then once his offer was accepted and he had signed a legally binding contract, Musk changed his mind. Billionaire Elon Musk is once again threatening to end his deal to buy Twitter, saying the social media giant is withholding information about spam and fake accounts. Now it looks like it might actually happen. In a surprise move, Musk went back and agreed to buy Twitter at his original price point of $44 billion. And this as a court battle with the social media company looms. But why is Musk even considering adding the social media firm to his portfolio? Compared to other platforms, Twitter is actually kind of small fry and it comes with a host of its own problems. Twitter as a company, as a stock, has massively underperformed. That is not a secret. Activists have tried to change it, but it is such a huge undertaking, fraught with conflict and politics and craziness. Those who could raise the money to buy it don't want the responsibility or the headache. So what does Musk see in Twitter? And what could he do with it if and when he becomes its owner? I'm Ian Sample, the Guardian's science editor. And this is Science Weekly. 5. T Dan Milmo, as the Guardian's global technology editor, you'll have been following this Elon Musk Twitter saga from its genesis. Take us back to where it all began last spring when Musk acquired a stake in Twitter. In early April, it was revealed that Elon Musk had accumulated a 9% stake in Twitter, taking a massive stake in a social media platform of immense influence and one in which he has about a hundred million followers himself, excited a lot of interest. Very soon afterwards it emerged that Elon Musk had been offered a place on the Twitter board and sort of accepted it and then turned it down and this barrelled very quickly over a few weeks into Elon Musk offering to buy Twitter outright for $54 dollars 20 a share which even then was pretty pricey, valuing the company at $44 billion and a pretty definitive loctite takeover agreement was signed between both parties in late April. At the time was it clear why Musk wanted to buy Twitter? I mean we know he's an avid user he seems to love causing drama and controversy on the platform but was there any logic in him purchasing Twitter? It definitely wasn't about finance or economics, you know Musk made that clear as the world's richest man that he could afford to buy it, it wasn't about making money, he made it very clear that he was when I quote a free speech absolutist he saw Twitter and sees Twitter as being extremely important to holding global conversations and he's absolutely right this is an influential platform and he just wanted to make sure that it stayed that way, that it defended his view of free speech, that it stayed a sort of public square of debate and a gathering point. What I've said is that I think Twitter is currently the the best or looked at another way the least bad of public square, a forum for the exchange of ideas nationally and internationally and I think it could be a lot better at that. Initially Twitter weren't that keen on Musk were they but they eventually accepted this 44 billion dollar offer only for it to then sort of fall apart soon after. Musk is known for being pretty unpredictable and despite signing that contract he then tried to get out of the deal, what happened there? So Elon Musk declared in July that he no longer wanted to buy Twitter because he alleged it had a massive problem, an undisclosed problem in terms of its scale with spam or automated vexatious automated accounts which Twitter says is less than five percent of its daily user base. Elon Musk baked to differ. The problem with spam bots is they're not monetizable i.e you can't sell them to advertisers or you can't say to advertisers look here's a user who will take a great deal of interest in your product and perhaps interact with it or buy it. So Elon Musk declared he was walking away from the deal which he'd signed so Twitter announced we're going to sue you for doing that and we'll see you in a court in the state of Delaware where we're incorporated thank you very much. Elon Musk turned around and said well i'm going to sue you too for not disclosing the bot issue properly and for indeed misleading investors. Dan tell me about these spam bots I mean what exactly are they? What are they doing on Twitter? Where do they come from? All that. Twitter doesn't deny that there's an awful lot of these automated accounts that aren't operated by human hand which are designed to disrupt your conversation or even defraud you or to send offensive content your way. Twitter says the vast majority of them are related to cryptocurrency or pornography. It suspends a vast amount of them every day. One million spam accounts are suspended every day by Twitter largely by automated processes but also it samples thousands of accounts a month using human scrutiny as well and also foreign language experts as well so it has a sort of layered system one that Elon Musk does not think is very good and indeed one that is questioned by Peter Mudge Zacco who was the former head of security at Twitter and was fired earlier this year and lodged a whistleblower complaint alleging various information security failings at the company. I should say that in response to these accusations from Zacco, Twitter's described them as a false narrative riddled with inconsistencies and inaccuracies. The former head of security at the social media company Twitter has accused the platform of hiding negligent practices, misleading federal regulators about its safety and failing to properly estimate the number of spam accounts in operation. Peter Zacco's whistleblowing testimony which has been given to the U.S. authorities could have serious consequences. So we've had all this suing, countersuing, all this far-sover spam bots and so on but where are we now? Where is the takeover right now? So on the 17th of October, Twitter were due to being caught with Elon Musk's representatives arguing that Elon Musk should be forced to buy the company as he said he would. Shortly before this was due to happen last week Elon Musk turned around and said actually you know what I'll buy the company and a judge in Delaware has given Musk until the 28th of October to do just that and really it's to get the debt financing in place for what is a pretty big chunk of money even for the world's richest man and if he doesn't complete the takeover by then he'll be back in court with Twitter trying to force him to do something that he now says he wants to do. Let's say this deal does actually go ahead. Is Twitter worth that amount of money? 44 billion dollars and if it's not does Musk have any plans like even if they're vague on how he's going to increase its value? Twitter at the moment is trading around the offer price of 54 dollars a share not quite but investors are a lot closer to valuing it in the same way that Elon Musk does now. In terms of the changes that Elon Musk is going to bring about he'll do something about Spam Bots I would imagine I don't know what. He's very clear on free speech I think we have to look at the long list of people who are banned from Twitter, Donald Trump top of it, people like Alex Jones, Katie Hopkins and I would imagine that they will come up for review. Elon Musk has been very clear that he's pro free speech within the boundaries of the law in the various countries in which Twitter operates so it probably won't be quite as Wild West as it would sound. He's also referred to X the Everything app as he calls it. Yeah I wanted to talk to you about the Everything app because on Twitter Elon said that buying Twitter could be like an accelerant for creating X the Everything app and from his previous comments it sounds like he's maybe modeling that on China's WeChat app which is this sort of Everything app which allows you to talk to people, to play video games, pay bills, order rides, book restaurants, you name it. Is that what's going on here that he thinks that Twitter could be this kind of kernel to build an Everything app for the rest of us or that it would fold it into some sort of app like that? Yeah so Elon Musk clearly has ambitions for Twitter that go beyond free speech that go beyond sorting the spam accounts. I think if we take him at his word because he can be a bit mischievous if we take him at his word he's going to use Twitter as a building block for something. When he met Twitter staff in June for an all hands meeting, Musk he referred to WeChat as being a great great app and he said he'd basically live on WeChat in China and now that he's subsequently referred to Twitter as being a potential basis for launching X which he calls his Everything app you can I think it's safe to draw a conclusion that he sees Twitter as potentially being an outside of China version of WeChat. By the way X is the name of the holding company that is going to buy Twitter a bit of corporate arcania there. It feels like this whole situation is constantly changing and saying what's going to happen it's about as certain as playing roulette right I mean red or black though what do you think is going to happen how do you think the chips are going to fall? As I've said the whole situation was vastly entertaining from a journalistic point of view there was always a lot of exciting drama and twists and turns to write about but sometimes you have to guiltily write you know way back in April the 25th Elon Musk did sign a quite long and quite detailed document saying I buy this company and he's now turned around and said he'll buy Twitter in part because he's sort of acknowledging that he can't get out of this so I think he will end up buying Twitter I think he will end up doing it by October the 28th as he's been told to I mean who knows he could still sort of try to backtrack again and he'll just have his feet held to the fire and there are numerous scenarios where this could really drag on and they involve bank debt potentially courts in New York it gets very very complicated and I won't bore you with that yet but I wouldn't be surprised if something eccentric happens again. Dan it's uh it sounds like we're gonna have to get you on a bit later to take us through it again probably some weeks or months down the line but for now um huge thanks for taking us through it all. You're welcome. Thanks again to Dan Milmo we've put a link to his reporting on the podcast web page at theguardian.com you'll also find a link to sign up to Techscape a Guardian newsletter which dives into how technology shapes our lives delivered straight into your inbox each week and that's it for today the producer was Madeline Finley the sound design was by Rudy Zagadlo and the executive producer was Max Sanderson we'll be back on Thursday see you then this is The Guardian