 The Guardian From next Monday, 17th May, England is set to go into the next stage of the roadmap out of lockdown as society begins to open up. But, new variants of coronavirus first discovered in India are spreading across the UK. This week, Public Health England designated one of these, known as B1617.2, as a variant of concern, and it's now the second most common variant in the UK. All of this comes as a situation in India remains as grim as ever, with the country struggling to deal with hundreds of thousands of new Covid-19 infections and thousands of deaths every day. So, what do we know about these coronavirus variants and how concerned should we be? From The Guardian, I'm Anand Jagatia and this is Science Weekly. We essentially have shown that this isn't a double mutant and that it isn't double the amount, the degree of resistance to antibodies. It's actually just the same as having either one together. This situation is moving quite quickly, but this morning I spoke to Nicola Davis, the Guardian's science correspondent, about what we know so far. So Nicola, can you tell us a bit more about these variants and why are scientists worried about them? Sure. So, there are three variants that were first detected in India and these are sometimes called the Indian Covid variants, although not everybody is comfortable with that phrasing. The three variants are called B.1.617,.1 and then.2 and.3. So, there are three variants that are very closely related. At first, all of them were designated variants under investigation by Public Health England. That means that they have mutations or some reason to think that they may cause some problems, whether that means that they're very transmissible or that they might in some way at least partially evade immune responses. So, when a variant is thought to have potentially properties that could help it in that way, it's deemed a variant under investigation. And one of those variants has since been designated a variant of concern. That means that there is some evidence to actually support the initial worries and the variant that is of concern is that known as B.1.617.2. So, a very snappy name there. And what's the situation in the UK then? How far have these variants spread and what kind of cases are we seeing? Okay, well, there's several ways of looking at this. We have several different data sources that we can turn to to kind of answer that question. So, you can look at the number of cases, so that's the number of people who've been infected with this variant that's been picked up, or you can look at the number of sequenced genomes that relate to a particular variant. Now, these obviously correlated, but they may be a bit different because in the latter case, you could have more than one specimen from each person. So, often when you're looking at the number of sequenced genomes, that's a bit higher than the number of actual cases. But both give us an idea of what is happening. So, if we look at sequenced genomes to start with, that data, we get that updated every day and that's from the COVID-19 Genomics UK Consortium. And so far, they found that there have been 1,723 of the variant of concern. Remember, that's B.1.617.2. Now, this data is updated regularly, so those numbers might have risen again by the time you hear this podcast. But at present, it means that the variant of concern accounts for just over 8% of all the COVID genome sequenced in the UK in the last 28 days. Okay, so that's sequences and it is going up. What about the number of cases? So, Public Health England are due to release a new update on case numbers today. But up to the 5th of May, there were 261 cases of B.1.617.1, 9 of B.1.617.3 and 520 of B.1.617.2. That's the variant of concern, remember. But given the trend that we're seeing in the genome sequencing figures, we can expect cases of this variant of concern to have risen considerably in the new data release. One issue that is concerning scientists is that the rise in cases of this variant of concern have occurred even though the country has been under quite tight restrictions. Remember, we are not yet at stage 3. That's going to happen on Monday with the relaxation of restrictions. So we have been under quite tight restrictions during the period where we've seen the rise in this new variant of concern. Is this variant of concern, is it spreading more quickly than the other variants that we have here in the UK already? There are concerns about the transmission. So there's some data from a survey called the REAC study, which is carried out by researchers at Imperial College London. And they've detected B.1.617.2, so this variant of concern, in samples during their survey. Now the numbers of genomes they sequenced are low. They only sequenced 26 of the positive tests in their study. But two out of the three positive tests that were sequenced in London, so they sequenced three, but two of them were of this variant of concern. And the researchers say that could mean that the variant is more transmissible than the Kent variant, which is sort of dominating in the UK, in populations where both of those viruses are circulating. Now on Friday, again, that was the 7th of May, Public Health England said they believed the new variant of concern is at least as transmissible as the Kent variant. But others have gone further. So Professor Tom Wensoliers at the University of Leuven, who's done quite a lot of work with UK scientists on the spread of the Kent variant, said that the new variant of concern, B.1.617.2, could be 60% more transmissible than the former. Now that hasn't been confirmed, but it's just showing you that there are scientists who are quite concerned that this might have an edge in terms of transmissibility. We know there is a meeting of SAGE experts in the UK today to discuss the situation, and it is fast moving, and more evidence and more data is coming out as we go along. Researchers are trying to learn as much as they can about these variants to understand what might allow them to spread more quickly and potentially to evade our vaccines. Professor Ravi Gupta's lab at the University of Cambridge has been studying the mutations in these variants, and they've shared some early findings in a pre-print. I got in touch with him earlier this week and spoke to him from Adambrook's hospital. So we started with the mutations that defined the earliest versions of that virus because we thought that it was important to understand what this double mutant was. There was this phrase used in India by scientists and journalists, and we wanted to understand whether that was a real thing or not. Was it as scary as people were making out? That label was due to the mutation L452R and E484Q. Those two key mutations in the spike protein receptor binding domain that locks onto our cells and lets the virus get in. It's also the target of multiple antibodies that we make, so it's a really important spot for the virus. Right, so this phrase double mutant, or I've also seen triple mutant, is that a phrase that we should be using? Is it useful or is it not very helpful? It's not very helpful, and the reason we did the work is because we wanted to stop people using it, but also to understand whether it was a real thing or not. So I think the overall thing is that these aren't useful terms because there are many viruses out there with major mutations that cause concern, and you can't label every one of them a double mutant because it doesn't tell anything about the characteristics. I mean, there are definitely a lot of numbers and letters flying around at the moment, and it can be a bit hard to keep track. So Public Health England has decided that B1.617.2, that's a variant of concern, but you say that you were looking at an earlier version of this virus, so before it split up into these different lineages. That's right. It's the point one variant. In fact, it's the first one that was isolated in India before the point two arose. It's unclear as to when point two arose, but it appears that point two has lost one of the key mutations, E484Q, and gained another T478K. So it does seem to be doing different things in populations, but it's important to know how it's changed from its sort of common ancestor, as it were. So how have you been studying these mutations then that we see in these variants? We've looked at sequences from India and the UK, and we have set up a collaboration with our colleagues in India via InSACOG, which is their equivalent of the Cog UK consortium. So we've been able to access some very special sort of sequences from Delhi in particular. We've made mutations, there's key mutations in the spike protein in an artificial virus that gives you very nice results in terms of comparison with real live SARS-CoV-2. So we use these systems in order to understand how well our antibodies from vaccine, for example, are able to tackle these mutant viruses or these variants. And we found that the 4 or 5-2 mutation gives you an order of sort of four or five-fold loss of susceptibility to antibodies, which is what's been reported before, because this mutation, for example, was found in the California variant that caused some concern in the US, and now data match very nicely with what's been shown. The other mutation, E484Q, has not really been studied very much, and we found that this mutation gave a similar sort of four or five-fold loss of neutralization sensitivity on its own. And then when we combined them, this was the important thing. It wasn't five plus five equals ten-fold loss, it was still around the five-fold mark. So we essentially have shown that this isn't a double mutant and that it isn't double the amount, you know, the degree of resistance to antibodies. It's actually just the same as having either one together. And that potentially explains why in the 0.2, the 617.2 variant that's emerged in the UK and is causing problems in India, we've actually lost that E484Q, probably because the virus didn't really need it for what it was trying to do. Okay, so it seems like it doesn't really matter if the virus has one of these mutations or both of them. The effect is pretty much the same in terms of the immune system. And so that could be the reason why the variant of concern has lost one of those mutations, because it doesn't really need both of them. That's right, they don't seem additive. Of course, there are caveats in that, you know, we only tested so far sort of 10-odd zero. But I think that it's in line with the data from other labs showing that the degree of resistance to neutralizing antibodies is not a severe one, it's a moderate, it's moderate. So you mentioned this four to five-fold reduction in the ability of our antibodies to deal with the virus if the virus has this mutation. How does that compare to other mutations that have arisen, for example, the variant that was originally discovered in South Africa? Yes, it's important to put the data in context of what we've seen before. In the same experiment that I've just mentioned, we put the E484K mutation in, which is a key driver of the worrisome nature of the South African origin variant, the B1.351. And we find that gives around a 10-fold impact in our assays. So that puts our findings into context and that it's not as severe as the South African variant. So taken together, then, these mutations that you've talked about, what do they mean for how well our vaccines are going to work against this strain? Well, it does indicate that there could be a degree of evading our vaccine program, but the level of protection is going to still be very high and get severe disease and death from having the vaccine. So you may get a low-level infection, you may feel some symptoms. Some people who had poorer responses to vaccination, the elderly, for example, or people who have had immune suppressant drugs may actually end up with a more severe disease. And that's the sort of thing we worry about. Taking a step back and looking at the global picture, I mean, a lot of people will be looking at the scenes in India in horror, really, as cases have gone up so dramatically and have kind of stayed there. Do we know anything about whether these variants that we're talking about, whether they're responsible for that dramatic rise in cases? After their social distancing measures were eased, the 617 started expanding. Now what we've been seeing is an increase in the point two, you know, the identification of point two variant infections in India. And this kind of mirrors what we've been seeing in the UK in that it's the 617.2 that seems to be expanding. And I predict this is going to be due partially due to the 478 mutation, giving it some advantage. There are a couple of other mutations in the virus and the spike that could be contributing to this as well. So I think it has some kind of advantage potentially in people who have had the vaccine or who have been infected before. And in our preprint recently, we showed that within a hospital outbreak, there was a preponderance of 617.2 viruses. And we've just been doing an analysis that shows many of them are identical, meaning that this virus may be transmitting between people who have had vaccines. So they were potentially reinfected? That's right, yes. Do we know whether this variant of concern that's spreading, whether that will eventually overtake what some people call the Kent variant that's currently the dominant variant in the UK? There is a distinct possibility in my view because the 617 variant from India has more immune escape potential in that there are mutations in the receptor binding domain, as I mentioned, that do confer some advantage in avoiding our antibody responses. And so this is a little bit of contrast to the B117 variant that some people call the UK or the Kent variant, which has a small loss of sensitivity to antibodies that we get from natural infection or vaccine. But it's smaller than we're seeing in the 617. So that may be enough to give the 617 an advantage in a population like the UK, where we've had quite a lot of background infection and we have a vaccine program. Whilst your overall outlook then on the situation, it seems like cases from these variants are going up. But as you've said, probably our vaccines are largely going to work. At the same time, from next week, May the 17th, England is set to ease its restrictions and there's going to be more mixing. Given everything that you've just said about these strains and their mutations and the number of cases, should that have a bearing on the way that we open up? Well until very recently, I was supportive of the idea of continuing to open up based on the vaccination. But I've seen data, the data we've pre-printed just recently in the last few days and what we're seeing makes me reconsider that and especially with the expansion of 617.2 infections in the UK. So I think I'm of the opinion that we should delay further easing, at least for the next two to three weeks until we have a clearer picture of what this virus is capable of doing and making a concerted effort to gather information as quickly as possible. Because again, once the virus is out there, it's very hard to rein it in without a national lockdown as we saw before. And so I think for the sake of a couple of weeks, I think we really need to buy ourselves a bit more time on this occasion. So Nicola, you've heard what Ravi's just said. He's advising caution and that maybe we should think about delaying the reopening that's due to happen on Monday by a couple of weeks until we know more. What does the sort of mood seem to be among other scientists? What are experts that you're speaking to saying? Well there are certainly a number of scientists saying that we should think about delaying or we should be acting very, very cautiously because of how fast this variant is growing and because we're still exploring what all the mutations mean. So we don't have a fantastic handle as yet on how this variant behaves. So that's really sort of the two key concerns. And it's worth remembering that at the moment a third of the UK adults haven't received a vaccination at all against COVID. About a third have had two doses and then the remainder have had one dose. So there is still a population there who could well catch this variant and we've got to remember that it's not just severe disease and death that we should be thinking about. There is also the fact that there are conditions such as long COVID that we should be thinking about. And even if people have been vaccinated, no vaccine is 100% effective. So there is still a risk that some of those people who have been vaccinated may still catch the virus and that's also a concern. So I think it is important to stress that we've talked to you about a lot of the worries about this variant and those are certainly issues that are concerning scientists, but we don't yet know what the full impact of this new variant of concern may be. So it's important not to panic, but to look at the data, to see what the science is telling us and to make sure that appropriate actions are taken. I mean, it does look like these variants have arrived in the UK initially because of travel from India. Could we be more concerned about importing potentially dangerous variants from abroad? As of Monday, we're going to have this traffic light system where you've got countries on the green, amber or red list, which relates to sort of measures around quarantine and testing when you enter England from those countries. So there are measures to try to reduce the importation of cases or at least reduce their ability to spread into the general population. However, some scientists have raised concerns about the fact that if you open up travel, for example, if you say it's fine to go to Portugal and you don't have to quarantine when you come back, if you were only mixing with local population, perhaps that might be less of a risk. But given that tourists tend to gather in particular areas and tourists from many different countries tend to gather in the same area, then that can mean that you have this risk, you could get variants passed around and they could enter the country even from green, green list countries. The key thing here is having a system so that you reduce the likelihood of a variant coming into the country. If it comes into the country, it's stopped at the quarantine level. And then if it still gets through and into the community, we have a really good sort of testing and tracing and isolating system to stop it from being passed on to lots of other people. So that's the sort of multi-layer approach that we need to try to stop these new variants coming in. Presumably, though, this isn't going to be the last variant that is given this variant of concern status because the virus is still mutating. So I guess what we should be braced for potentially more to come and ones that are maybe even more dangerous than this one. I think it's certainly true that there will be further variants of concern anywhere where you have high levels of infection. I mean, that's one of the risks for new variants developing. And we know that in countries, including India, which are experiencing a really devastating situation right now, there are a very high number of infections. And that means you have lots of opportunities for new variants to emerge. And we know how quickly variants can spread not only within a country, but also around the world. So that's why it's so important that we have this genome sequencing. And the UK's genome sequencing efforts are some of the best in the world. We do have very, very good surveillance of what's happening with these variants. And that's really, really important. But it's also really important that we help other countries too in that respect, because every country really needs to be able to keep an eye on what's happening in terms of variants, because we're all in this together. And what happens in one country will affect other countries. So I know there's a lot of work going on at the moment. Scientists are proposing a number of different ways that we can help support other countries to also keep a very close eye on what's happening with new variants. Thanks very much, Nicola. And thanks to Professor Ravi Gupta from the University of Cambridge, who we heard from earlier. You can read the latest coronavirus coverage from Nicola and the rest of the science desk at theguardian.com. That's it for this week. Thanks for listening. If you want to get in touch with the show, you can drop us a line, Science Weekly at theguardian.com. Next week, Shivani Darvay talks to The Guardian's tech editor Alex Hearn about NFTs or non-fungible – love that word – tokens. They've been used to sell everything from tweets to digital art online, sometimes for millions of dollars. But how do they actually work? And is there a catch?