 This is The Guardian. With the extreme heatwaves we're having this summer, many of us will be heading to beaches and coastlines. If you have gone, you might have seen signs up, warning against going near or touching any sick or dead birds. And that's because the UK is experiencing its worst ever outbreak of avian influenza, bird flu. And it's hard to comprehend how devastating it's been. It's really horrific and actually I was thinking about like how do you tell this story about bird flu? Because if these birds were falling in cities around us people would be absolutely horrified. Rather than the birds most of us encounter regularly, the outbreak has so far been moving through seabird populations. Lots of these are really vulnerable birds already and then bird flu comes and wipes out like three quarters of colonies. I know it's really horrible to picture but birds have been literally falling from the sky in distress. I've seen videos of islands and conservationists walking around in hazmat suits and it's literally littered with dead birds. Every few meters is another dead bird. So today I'm speaking to biodiversity reporter Phoebe Weston about why this strain of bird flu has been so deadly. How it's got into the wild bird populations and what we can expect in the months ahead. From The Guardian I'm Madeline Finlay and this is Science Weekly. Phoebe this current outbreak of bird flu, how bad is it? So the word unprecedented is generally overused but this situation merits it. We've got a really contagious dangerous version of bird flu that is ripping through our wild bird populations. It's not just in the UK, it's been detected in every country in Europe. It's pretty much all over the world and in the UK it is impacting our breeding seabirds the most. We have an incredible array of fantastic seabirds in this country. So Britain's got 8 million seabirds and 90% of the planets mankshir waters and around two-thirds of the planets northern gannets and great skewers. So the fact that it's impacting them is very devastating and the mortality rates seem to be pretty high. So this is going to have implications for global conservation, just what's happening in the UK alone, let alone what's happening in all the other countries in the world. You said that the mortality rate was very high. Do we know exactly how deadly this virus is likely to be? It's still not known exactly what the death rate is. Some people have told me anecdotally they think about 50% of wild birds die. Other research suggests it's much higher. There's actually a paper published back in 2006 which found it had 100% death rate in poultry and if you think about wild birds they're kind of similar to domestic birds. It's an incredibly dangerous disease and thus far they found that in for example populations of great skewers, so the UK has around 16,000 great skewers and on the sites which have got bird flu they think between 64 to 85% of the birds have died. And how widespread is the virus at the moment? There's not been a huge amount of testing so there's I think there's been 1,300 or 1,400 recorded cases in the UK, so those are those are carcasses which have been tested. But that is probably the tip of the iceberg because the nature of these birds dying, lots of them are dying at sea, their carcasses can't be collected so we can't test them. Also I think conservationists are quite concerned not to make guesses because as I say we really don't know but Dr Mark Avery, he used to be the RSPB, he told me we know tens of thousands have died and it could well be hundreds of thousands of birds that have died. It's absolutely catastrophic. So how did it get into these particular seabird populations? Where has the virus actually come from? So the virus comes from intensive poultry farming and this virus is called H5N1, there's loads of bird flu's but this is the one that we've got at the moment which is so bad. It was first recorded back in 1996 in I think it was a goose farm in Asia and people have kind of been studying it since and then it came over to the UK in our poultry farms and I don't know if you guys remember but last year free-range chickens had to be shut up from November 2021 to May and that's because the wild birds come into contact with the infected domestic birds and once it's in the wild bird population it's a terrible time of year for spreading it because these seabird colonies have formed these huge maternity units on these rocky outcrops and then it just spreads like wildfire. Why is it these particular populations? Is it clear why it's impacting gannets say and not pigeons? Yeah the reason it's impacting our seabirds is because of the way they nest. I don't know if you've been to a seabird colony it generally stinks because there's bird feces everywhere and they're nesting really close together. They're often sort of seem to be fighting and squawking at each other and this disease is spread through fecal matter, through birds breathing on each other, through mucus and so that means it's an absolute hot bed for disease. So what's happening to the birds when they catch this virus? How does it affect them? It's grim. They basically sort of stop moving or they're not afraid of humans so you can get really close to them and then they kind of start having slow spasms apparently. They'll sort of try and flap, the chicks will try and flap but they sort of writhe around and it takes normally about an hour for the bird to die and in terms of what's actually happening to the birds they get diarrhea, breathing difficulties, a swollen head apparently as well and then death. Phoebe, should we have done more with our poultry to stop it from escaping as it has done? Is there anything else that can be done apart from keeping these chickens inside? People have known about this virus for a while and people have been telling governments to have better biosecurity within intensive poultry farms. For example, in the UK we import lots of chicks, they're imported into the UK and then fattened here so there's lots of international movement of poultry and that could be a serious vector of disease. One researcher said to me we should have a domestic poultry production so we shouldn't be getting any chicks and I think some people would also say this is an argument to move away from intensive chicken farms because these animals being bred in such a small area can be a real hot spot for disease and if we know now everyone is so aware about the risk of global pandemics and this risk is only going to get worse that perhaps we could rethink how much we rely on intensive chicken production. So how long could this outbreak last? If it's become very widespread in the wild bird population are we likely to see this going on for a while? The short answer is we don't know. I feel like I've answered lots of these questions saying we don't know but really the research on this is in its infancy. One possible source of hope is the fact that, as I mentioned, the sea birds are particularly badly affected and in the coming weeks they're going to start leaving the UK again. They migrate in, they raise their chicks and then they leave. So when they move to wherever in the world they spend the remainder of the year they're not going to be in such close contact with each other so it's possible that it will start to decline certainly in the UK in the coming weeks. I think a key question we need to answer is immunity and thinking about whether these birds can get immunity in order to understand how long this is going to go on for. And of course chicks can't have any immunity unless it's passed down from a parent. Is this going to have a massive impact on how many chicks are born in the coming years? Definitely, yes. This bird flu outbreak has been notable for its high mortality in chicks. That's like a huge hit on the population as it is. There's another factor with sea birds is that they only have one or two chicks a year so this is wiped out like a whole generation. In some colonies all chicks of certain species of bird have died and sea birds are fairly long-lived so it's going to take the population a lot more to bounce back than if you think of say a garden bird's blue tits can have like a dozen chicks. They can have in one summer. Sea birds have one or two and equally the average sea bird doesn't come to maturity until five years so we're not really going to know the true impacts of this for several years. How likely is it that we'll see much spillover into humans or in fact into other mammals as well? They don't think that this particular strain is that infectious to humans but previous bird flu strains have been so I think we should exercise caution. Some seals have been reported to have died in the US from this bird flu. There's also research that shows it can kill members of the cat family so there was a tiger that died from bird flu, leopards, domestic cats. Yes, it can it can get into other species. And is there anything we can do to mitigate these effects to try and in some way control the outbreak? Okay so as individuals don't pick up any dead birds, any dead wild birds, don't go near them keep your dogs away from them and there's a death for a helpline to report possible bird flu deaths to. Obviously lots of the islands and nature reserves where bird flu is happening have been closed off to the public and then lots of people want the government to do more. They say we need way better surveillance of what's happening, we need more guidance for effective carcass collection so for those conservationists who are on islands where there's just dead birds everywhere they need to know what to do with those carcasses, what is a safe way to dispose of them and then better biosecurity on poultry farms containing birds and always testing to see if they have disease so that if there was an outbreak within one population we could control it. Phoebe, we report on a lot of difficult upsetting stories on Science Weekly but there is something about this one that it just really makes me want to cry. It's so sad and the way that you've described the scenes that people are seeing on these islands it's really horrifying. Is there any light at all? Is there any kind of speckle in the distance of of hope for these birds? I completely agree with you. I find it really really sad. These are such magnificent creatures and like as if it wasn't bad enough how their declines are driven by loss of their food source in the sea, loss of habitat, human driven pressures on their environment and now we've unleashed this bird flu on them from intensive chicken farms. We can only really watch at this stage and there's nothing you can do to help these sea birds now. I think hopefully there could be good to come out of it if we can be more vigilant in the future. We have to do everything we can to save the few that we have left. Phoebe, thank you so much for telling us about this. Thanks Maddie. Thanks again to Phoebe Weston. You can find links to her coverage of the story on the podcast webpage at theguardian.com and she also wrote about the bird flu outbreak for the Guardian's Environment Newsletter down to earth and I'd really recommend signing up to get a weekly digest of the biggest environment stories, the good news, the not so good news and everything else you need to know straight into your inbox. Just search for down to earth from the Guardian. And that's it for today. The producer was Anand Jagatia, the sound design was by Rudy Zagablo and the executive producers were Lorna Stewart and Danielle Stephens. We'll be back on Thursday. See you then. This is The Guardian.