 This is The Guardian. The record for the largest known plant on earth was recently broken by a seagrass, roughly three times the size of Manhattan, discovered off the coast of Australia. Seagrasses are the only flowering plants that can live in seawater and pollinate when submerged. They often grow in groups creating underwater meadows that look a lot like terrestrial grasslands. Studies suggest that seagrass is one of the most effective carbon sinks. They can also support an incredible amount of biodiversity. On the UK coastlines that means anemones, sea squirts, crabs, sea snails, cuttlefish and even seahorses. They're also among the most threatened ecosystems on the planet. The UK only has a tiny fraction of its original seagrass meadows left. So now efforts are growing to bring them back. But is it actually possible to turn mudflats into thriving seagrass meadows again? And could they really be the carbon stores we so desperately need? From The Guardian, I'm Madeline Findlay and this is Science Weekly. On a gloriously sunny but being England, still rather windy afternoon last week, The Guardian finally let me out of the studio. Sadly not to sunbathe. Instead I headed down to the Solent, a straight of the English Channel, to meet Dr Tim Ferrero, a marine biologist and seagrass specialist at the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust. Suncream applied and bottles full of water, we walked along the seawall by Farlington marshes with some very hot looking cows peering over at us. Eventually we headed down onto the other side, onto the mudflats in low tide and trudged our way towards an established seagrass meadow. There are human impacts out here but the basic salt marsh and the seaweed and the seagrass are as primordial as you like. It's something that's been here for thousands of years. And Tim, you're part of a project trying to rewild a lot of the Solent where we are with seagrass. Looking over these meadows now, how does it make you feel to see these kinds of expanses of green? It's lovely to see this large expanse but at the same time I'm reminded that this is actually almost like a relic of the amount of seagrass that we used to have in the Solent around the UK and in fact in the North Atlantic. How much seagrass across the UK coasts have we lost and when did we lose it? It's very difficult to be precise, certainly we know that in the 20s, almost 100 years ago now, there was a wasting disease which tore through all of the eelgrass in the North Atlantic and wiped out, we think over 95% of all the seagrass meadows. We believe there was some recovery but that was moving into a time 50s, 60s, 70s which weren't great for marine pollution so human impacts were increasing. Another disease outbreak in the 80s and this time that the sort of the pathogen was identified. It's a slime mould called labyrinthula zosteri. I like that the slime mould has a suitably villainous name. Well yes, the labyrinthine and that's because the way it grows through the cells of the leaf, sort of a bit like it weaves its way through the labyrinth of the spaces and cells in the leaves. So you can see it on a big seagrass leaf very clearly the way it works but there are other pressures as well, you know, the water quality causes things like the algal growth and then there are physical pressures as well so certain types of fishing gear like bottom toad gear, trawls and dredges can be very damaging for seagrass. They actually tear up the root mat and that is the most vulnerable part of a seagrass meadow which can take a long time to recover. Globally, seagrass is shrinking by 7% each year, which is about the equivalent of a football pitch vanishing every 30 minutes. With such huge swathes being lost, rewilding attempts may seem like trying to bail out the Titanic with a bucket. But the climate crisis is providing plenty of reasons to try. Seagrasses can be a good coastal defence, reducing the speed and force of incoming waves and of course they are fantastic carbon sinks. Not only is it a growing plant so there's a certain amount of carbon captured in the leaves and down into the roots, the real store of carbon is actually in the mud and sand below the seagrass meadow. So what happens is when the water flows through a seagrass meadow, through all of those blades of seagrass, it slows down and lots of particles suspended in the water drop down onto the seabed and they're often rich in carbon and they get buried and in a muddy environment like this where you can see some of the mud is quite dark black colour. So that's a lack of oxygen, it's anoxic and carbon material in low oxygen gets preserved. Same as Pete Bogman for our species of seagrass, the carbon capture can be a bit variable, depends on the type of sediment. What we do know is globally we've got maybe 0.1, 0.2 percent of the seabed covered in seagrass and that is covering 10 to 15 percent of the global carbon storage budget. Right now while the tide is out the grass, it does look like grass but it's flat against the mud and you wouldn't necessarily think of it as a meadow or even an ecosystem. Seagrass when the tide is out is an acquired taste, you know you can see it and the nice thing is you don't need to be diving, you can actually walk out and look at it. These leaves are fairly buoyant so when the water comes in like all the seaweeds as well everything stands up and then it's much easier to see that you've got a really sort of vibrant meadow here and a real sort of promoter of what we call ecosystem services, shelter areas, refuge, foraging areas. So there are so many species like that, you know species like cod, spider crab, the cuttlefish for example out in the sollent, visiting the sollent at the moment to lay their eggs on the seagrass. It's a vital supporting habitat for another fantastic species in itself and a commercially important species as well. You know we've got this gorgeous sun raining down on us that's kind of making the whole landscape glitter but as you look closely you can see all that movement and lots going on on the surface. Yeah even at low water you can see a lot going on. It's a good time, you know, the trails behind the snails you can actually see where they've gone, the worms come out on the surface and you may occasionally see a little squirt for example from a burrowing worm or a burrowing shell squirting a bit of water out, there's a little crab wandering about over there. So yeah the absolute wildlife paradise is a mudflap like this. It's a strange kind of paradise isn't it but I do feel a bit like I'm standing on paradise. Yeah. A different world certainly. It is a different world. So Tim let's go and have a look at the site that you're trying to rewild. I'm really curious to see what it's going to look like in comparison to this seagrass meadow. Okay we'll have to have a bit of a change of change of footwear. Okay. Okay. When Tim says change of footwear, what he actually had in store for me were mud patterns. I would recommend you google them but to paint a picture I had to strap on planks of wood to my boots with thin pieces of rope. These attached we unsteadily walked towards canes sticking out the mud in the distance which were marking out the rewilding areas and I can't say it was the easiest thing to do. Oh gosh this is the easy bit. I'm not sure how I'm going to fair in the front one. The harder bit. Right I'm gonna just let myself sink a little bit. There we go. Okay Tim it looks like we've made it over to the first cane and now instead of the kind of green landscape that we were looking at before it's much browner so this is the site which we're trying to rewild with seagrass. So tell me about the project how did it start and what have you been doing? So I guess we started working on this really almost at the beginning of lockdown because for many years Hampshire and Isle of Wildlife Trust we've surveyed the seagrass meadows and we thought we'd be quite well placed to actually do that sort of work. So over the last year and a bit we visited some sites we learned how to recognize the flowers what stage they were at and then in sort of the end of the summer end of August September even into October we that's when we actually collected seagrass seeds and to do that involved walking out onto mud like this with your mud patterns on and a bodyboard lying on the board and picking through the seagrass to find the flowering shoots they're called spades that then went to our partners at University of Portsmouth the spades then have to be rotted down actually call it the process rotting out and then pack them up into our seed pods these little hessian bag pouches brought them out here in December and on December the first we were out here last year planting our seed pods we put a number of seeds into each pod to try and guarantee one seedling per pod. So it's a complex and labour intensive process not least motivating volunteers to go out on bodyboards in the mud in December at 5am to bury the hessian bags but there is a lot of enthusiasm for it projects like this are happening around the UK's coastline in Scotland Wales and England the problem is getting the seeds into the ground is just the start the survival rate of seagrass seeds sits at about 10% and restoration efforts have had less success compared with mangroves and salt marshes but these kinds of projects are just in their infancy still figuring out what works and what doesn't. Going out since have you spotted any seagrass starting to grow? We've been to our site on the Isle of Wight at Seaview and we've seen some seedlings there and we've managed to feel down with our fingers it's a sort of a sandier site and we can feel the hessian bag down in the sand so we absolutely know we've had some germination and some seedlings growing. What we've got here as you can see before you is you know we've got our site laid out but it has this covering of algae at the moment so we're really sort of on tenterhooks because we're kind of going to have to wait till this algal bloom dies down it will be lovely it's successful it might not be and we always have to remember that we're not dealing with tree planting it's a much less understood process it's a much earlier stage it's exciting but it's also quite nerve-wracking to visit a site like this is only the second time we visited this one. What are you hoping will happen next? Well I guess if we can get a network of seedlings across the plot if they grow on their root mats would start to grow out their roots would spread hopefully over over a year or two those root mats would join up and then we've got the beginnings of a proper seagrass meadow so it's a slow process. If that's less successful then we have to consider a number of things one we have to consider our methods and there are other ways that we could potentially get the seed into the ground you could sort of maybe inject them into the mud there are other things that we can look at as well so that there is a possibility of should could we grow seedlings in a lab or a nursery for example we have to be open to changing our methods we have to be open to learning and finding out what works best. You've talked about how many seeds we might see actually taking from all those hessian bags that you've planted into these mud flats and some of the challenges as well whether it's the weather or the algae I mean is this potentially a fool's errand the aspiration is to get the seagrass back to where it was 100 years ago I mean it seems like it's going to be a huge challenge. I think there's no doubt that it is a tremendous challenge and it takes a lot of willpower a lot of support a lot of enthusiasm even to to start actually you know but and to keep going is it a fool's errand well I mean we don't know you never know do you if you're on a fool's errand until it suddenly becomes obvious I don't think it is though because there are many things around the restoration work that raising a public awareness the other work we're doing to try and actually improve the marine environment to make it a better place for seagrass to grow all of those have a positive impact so it's all pushing in the right direction what we ultimately want is more seagrass and a better wilder marine environment because they are incredibly diverse and visually striking they're every bit as good as a wildflower meadow and a forest. Tim thank you so much we try and slowly make our way back to the shoreline now. Thanks again to Dr Tim Ferrero and the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust. This episode has been part of a special series from the Guardian, Wild World, taking a look at rewielding efforts around the globe from beavers to bogs. You'll find links on the podcast web page at theguardian.com. This episode was produced by me Madeline Finley, the sound design was by Solomon King and the executive producer was Lorna Stewart. Ian Sarnpool will be back on Thursday with another Wild World special. He's speaking to Phoebe Weston about reintroducing wolves to struggling ecosystems. It's not one to miss. See you then.