 The Guardian Before the games have even begun, Olympic athletes who arrived in Tokyo are feeling the heat of a Japanese summer. Beach volleyball players have found the sand too hot for their feet during practice and as fears are mounting that this will be the hottest games for athletes on record. And the world is gearing up for COP26, The Guardian's global environment editor John Watts told us in the last episode of Science Weekly that extreme weather events are tied in to rising global temperatures. For sure the fundamental cause is warming caused by greenhouse gases which are produced by cars, by cutting down forests, by industry and so forth. The question is whether there are additional cascading effects or tipping points that is making one problem worse. So the problem becomes non-linear. It's uncertain but let's say scientists are more worried about this than they were a few weeks ago. So I wanted to look into what happens to our bodies in extreme heat. From our previous episode we learnt about the very real consequences extreme heat has on human health and wellbeing. But it turns out there aren't actually too many studies about what happens to people when they're exposed to these situations apart from in the world of sports science which is what we'll be looking at today. When we talk about elite athletes these are not your average individuals. These are individuals who are incredibly focused, incredibly determined and able voluntarily to push themselves into places where the average mortal wouldn't go. From The Guardian I am Shivani Dave and this is Science Weekly. Mike Tipton is a professor of human and applied physiology from the University of Portsmouth. Firstly, could you talk me through a little bit of the focus of your research? Generally I'm from the extreme environments laboratory at the University of Portsmouth within the School of Sport Health and Exercise Science. We look at the psychological, psycho-physiological and pathophysiological responses to extreme environments so heat, cold, altitude, cold water. We look at the protection, preparation and prevention of illnesses in those environments. So it's a pretty broad remit. When you do research with sports and human performance testing athletes seem to be a good test subject for this area. Why is that? Probably with the work we do with the English Institute of Sport and with elite athletes is pretty focused in the heat because quite a lot of the major sporting events occur in a hot environment and a cold can impact athletes but it tends to impact athletes like mountaineers with things like freezing and non-freezing cold injury. But in terms of events like soccer finals or the Olympics then that tends to be much more summer related and heat related. When we talk about elite athletes these are not your average individuals. These are individuals who are incredibly focused, incredibly determined and able voluntarily to push themselves into places where the average mortal wouldn't go and that includes some of the heat illnesses. So would some of your findings be able to apply to regular people, not the elite athletes, us mere mortals who might be doing labour intensive jobs and so on? Oh yes, no absolutely. The area of sports science actually started as work physiology and to this day there are many more people exercising in the heat because of their work, their job, than because they're an elite athlete or even because they're involved in a sporting activity. So although it maybe doesn't get quite the attention it once did, occupational physiology and people having to work in the heat is important and they will suffer the same consequences as elite athletes if they overheat. The marathon and the race walking events during Tokyo 2020 will be moved to Japan's northernmost island because of worries about heat and there are similar things happening with the Qatar World Cup where the tournament will actually take place in the winter time now. What happens to the body when someone is in that intense extreme heat? I mean there's a couple of things to take into consideration. Firstly you've got the heat that comes from the environment so that's obviously particularly related to air temperature, it's related to humidity, the amount of water vapor in the environment and it's related to the solar load, the heat that you're getting from the sun. But then the other source of heat is from your own metabolism. So if you're at rest you're producing about the same amount of heat as a 60-90 watt bulb. But that goes up to nearly 2 kilowatts when you're exercising hard so that's the equivalent of a 2 bar fire inside of you. So what athletes are able to do is produce lots of heat over a long period because they're so fit so that represents an enormous challenge to both their ability to maintain their body temperature without it going out of control and then becoming hypothermic and heat ill. And it also puts a tremendous strain on their cardiovascular system because the body is now trying to send blood to the skin to cool but also to the working muscles to keep them functioning. So it's a really large physiological challenge that exercising hard in the heat represents. And even though our bodies have ways of dealing with this overheating including what Mike called behavioral thermoregulation aka craving shade when you've been out in the sun for too long, part of his research looks at ways in which we can remedy the effects of heat exhaustion. Right so I mean you're looking across the board at lots of potential innovations so you know those innovations might include things like improving thermal comfort, they might look at improving sweat secretion, reducing the amount of the barrier to heat loss by clothing, making sure you maintain hydration, trying to make sure people's mechanical efficiency is high so that they don't generate any more heat than they need to when they exercise. You can increase heat tolerance. You even can start talking about selecting people who are relatively good in the heat and also go at how they might pace an event to make sure they don't overheat. So we're looking both at psychological as well as physiological interventions into the performance of people in the heat. Now the most important intervention that you can come up with is heat acclimatization. So that's getting people to repeatedly expose themselves to heat and as they do that with time with repeated exposures they'll start to get better and better at losing heat. They'll produce more sweat, it'll have less salt in it, their blood flow will improve, their blood volume will increase so they can send blood to the skin and the muscles more efficiently and at the same time they'll feel more and more comfortable in the heat which gives them more confidence. You consider all of these things to try and optimize performance in the heat. It's very unlikely that you're going to do better in a very hot environment than you will in a cool environment but what you're trying to do is minimize the decrement. So that's what happens with athletes. How can the kind of work you and your colleagues do translate to non-athletes? Will the physiological effects of extreme heat lead to the same kinds of results in regular people? Yes, no, there's definitely a sort of a continuum that you go along and at the lower end of that is muscle cramps and heat cramps and feeling fatigue and weakness and a rapid pulse and lightheadedness and fainting and then it goes on to cessation of sweating and hot dry skin and you've gone then from the sort of fainting end of the spectrum through heat exhaustion to a medical emergency which is heat stroke. But obviously by testing people we also learn about the responses to heat, we learn about how to mitigate the problems associated with heat and a lot of those, you know, when I'm asked to give advice to the general population I'm giving advice that has been taken in part from the work we've done with those elite athletes like ways of cooling, putting your hands into cold water is a very effective way of cooling people. We developed that idea working with British cycling but it works just as good for people who've got hot gardening. Things like getting used to the heat, avoiding the heat by staying in the shade, avoiding solar load, all of these, they're very interactive in terms of their benefits. You've also mentioned that dehydration plays a big role in all of this. How important is access to clean drinking water when coming up against extreme heat? Well once you get air temperature above your skin temperature then you'll actually start to gain heat from the environment through the roots that when it's colder you would normally lose it so that's radiation, conduction and convection. And therefore you're only left with one physical root by which you can keep the body cool and that's the evaporation of sweat and I emphasize the evaporation because it's not sufficient just to produce sweat. Sweat that doesn't evaporate doesn't cool you because it's the actual evaporation of that sweat that is cooling. Now what that means is if you're sweating heavily, a human sweating heavily can be producing 2 liters of sweat per hour and that sweat is coming from body fluids and so that has to be replenished. Otherwise sweat diminishes and body temperature increases. That's really interesting and makes me think I should definitely be drinking more water before I head on to the park. Recently my colleagues did a brilliant report on sweltering cities around the world where temperatures are regularly hitting about 50 degrees Celsius and in those countries there are some people who manage to live quite comfortably. How much variation is there between individuals when it comes to this kind of stuff and how much does acclimatization come into it? Well no there's quite a lot of natural variation. So if you go back to the very early work on goldmine workers tested in the 1950s where there was over 42,000 goldmine workers tested for their heat tolerance. About 25% were naturally heat tolerant and about 15% are naturally heat intolerant. So you've got an enormous individual variation and the really important thing about that is once you know what an individual's tolerance to heat is you can customize the interventions to try and maximize their adaptation to heat and therefore maintain their performance in the heat. So yeah I mean as with an awful lot of human physiology there's an enormous amount of individual variation. Some of that is just based on genetics, differences in the way people respond to heat, their cardiovascular system, their sweating and thermoregulatory system and then quite a lot of the variation comes with things like the state of heat acclimatization. So with that in mind how important is it to have the right infrastructure and resources to help prevent you know human cost of extreme heat? The first thing on this path and on this journey is to recognize the threat and it's been kind of interesting in that for centuries particularly with elite athletes people have considered you know I'm concerned themselves with things like nutrition, with things like training regimes but actually temperature has taken a bit of a back seat and yet you know if you don't train properly you won't perform as well, if you don't eat properly you won't perform as well, if you don't get your thermal strategies right you could die and so you know it's not just this is not just a performance related issue this is a health related issue. So in the last episode we heard that extreme weather events like extreme heat are on the rise and they look like they're going to continue to keep rising meaning more of us will be living in higher temperatures. So what can people do? Well I mean on a day to day basis you know we're going to have to do things like you know understand the best ways of staying cool, understand, seek shade, avoid the sun, wear lightweight clothing, dehumidify the environment, maybe air condition the environment, look at things like cooling by hand immersion you know there's lots of things you can do to avoid heat and to mitigate the impacts of heat and you know you're going to have to keep a very close eye on children who will heat up very quickly particularly in direct sunlight and keep an eye on the elderly and over 75 year olds are particularly badly affected by heat exposure. So what's going to happen is we're just going to have a consideration of heat just go higher and higher up the list of priorities and things we consider when we go when we decide if we're going to go somewhere what we're going to do in that environment what's doable in terms of you know occupational demands it will be a matter of time before you know we will have to start rearranging what we do and perhaps where we live and where we grow plants and where we you know put humans because of the environment that we've created for ourselves. That's really interesting thanks for all your time today Mike. Thank you very much. Yeah I think we covered quite a lot. Oh yeah we did. We've gone from climate change through occupational physiology to elite sports so yeah we have covered a lot. You can find links to the Guardian's coverage of Extreme Weather and the Olympics of course in the podcast's webpage. The games will also be something that we are looking into next week but if you've got any thoughts comments or feedback even episode ideas maybe then drop us a message at scienceweekly at theguardian.com. Science Weekly will be back next week but bye for now.