 This is The Guardian. Can you think of anything worse than swimming in sewage? Looking down and when you're up to here and you've just got poo floating around you is really not very pleasant. It makes you feel quite sick. Here in the UK, it's not that difficult to imagine. Water companies have been pumping raw sewage into UK waterways at incredible rates. One single sewage dump last year went on for 5,000 hours. I find it upsetting when we're out and we see condoms, toilet paper and excrement floating in the sea. Yeah, it's disgusting. It's also really bad for the environment, wildlife and us, whether you're a wild swimmer, beachgoer or fish eater. I tend to feel a bit of a mild fever, a bit sick in your stomach and that can last an afternoon or a couple of days. So why is all this sewage getting pumped into our water? And is there anything we can do about it? From The Guardian, I'm Madeline Finlay and this is Science Weekly. Helena Horton, you're an environment reporter for The Guardian and you've been covering this story about raw sewage that's been pouring into UK waters. Any amount is obviously pretty gross, but how much sewage are we actually talking about? So we haven't got all the figures for this year yet, but we have seen dozens of beaches being shut. The South Coast has been particularly badly affected this summer and we do know there's going to be absolutely loads of sewage poured in. So last year we have the figures for water companies released sewage 25,000 times into designated bathing waters off the English coast, that's just coastal releases. In total, so all the sewage that was released into rivers and the sea was over a period of 2.7 million hours in one year alone. I mean it's just so shocking hearing those numbers. How and why is this happening? What's going on? So our wastewater, which is sewage and other waste that goes down the toilet, down the drain, and our surface water, which is when it rains and you get rain building up on the road, they don't have their own separate systems. And that means that when it rains, surface water goes into the wastewater and it all turns into one horrible sort of like gush of water and sewage and that goes into our waterways. It's supposed to only happen under extreme circumstances when you do have a storm, but actually they're doing it all the time and that's partly due to not investing in sewage that kind of match the population growth that we've had. We're talking about it now because it's been a particularly bad summer and more of us have been going to beaches and rivers in the hot weather and maybe noticing this, but it's not a new problem, is it? No, so it's been happening for decades. So those who might remember a few decades ago, we were known as the Dirty Man of Europe and before we joined the EU, we did have toxic warnings around our beaches and it was particularly bad. People remember that our seas used to be really smelly and horrible. Things have improved since, but they are still bad and perhaps getting worse. The data for this year isn't out yet, but I would say from the amount of discharges we've seen, it probably is going to look quite bad. Helena, it's not nice even thinking about sewage being pumped into our waterways, but I want to understand the specific risks of this. Starting with wildlife, what kind of effects can raw sewage being in the water have on our water? Well, I think that's a good question. I think that's a good question. I think that's a good question. So, sewage contains nutrients from our food, like nitrogen and phosphates, and these, when released into our waterways, build up and they cause things to grow like algae. So think of a clean river. You can see to the bottom, it's full of fish. The water is flowing healthily, it's sparkling, it's clean. If you've walked next to one of our rivers recently, you might see it's a thick green sludge and you can't see anything, even if you just walk up to the bottom of the river. So, if you're looking for a clean river, you might see a clean river. It's a sludge and you can't see anything, even if you tried to. All the water is just murky from all the pollution. This chokes our wildlife. So, fish are quite sensitive and they're very sensitive to pH levels, they're very sensitive to chemical levels. We've seen mass fish die off when you've had a lot of sewage pumped into the water because they can't deal with the change in the water quality. And also, even if you have only a small amount, you end up with less healthy fish. In terms of plants, when you get a thick growth of algae on top of the water, it shields them from the light that they can't do photosynthesis and they end up dying off. So, you end up with a river that's just full of algae. Helena, I was actually walking along a river this morning and there was some green, gross, gunky stuff on top. Could that have been the kind of algae bloom that you're talking about? That'll either be algae or it could also be floating penny water. It happens on canals, which is an invasive species. But yeah, if it is gunge, it's not a plant, it'll be algae, yeah. If you saw lots of green gunk on a river or pond, you might be wary of it and you might hesitate before diving in. But saying that lots of people do love to go wild swimming or do water sports and lots of us just love to go for a paddle. So does this algae pose a threat to us as well? Not all algae does, but there's a type of algae specifically called blue-green algae, which happens after you get a nutrient overload. And this algae is very toxic. It's toxic to dogs and so much it can kill them, to people walking dogs around areas that have this blue-green algae, shouldn't let them near the water and that can make humans very ill. It can even hospitalise you. And I assume the sewage in of itself also poses a risk to us too. Yes, a study out last week actually showed that surfers have three times the amount of antibiotic resistant E. coli in their gut compared to non-surfers. And these are people who come into contact with our seawater quite often. So there's a correlation there and rural sewage contains E. coli. That's one of the most common things you can get from it. So you can get stomach upsets, sometimes quite severe. And it contains all manner of diseases because it's anything that the person has, who obviously it came from, could be in the rural sewage. So there's this risk for people who might be surfing or swimming. And as you said, some of the beaches have been closed this summer to avoid that kind of contact. But there's another kind of way we can come into contact with this, which is the fish that we're eating. I mean, could this make us sick? It's been really badly hitting the seafood industry actually. So even last year when we did have some bad sewage overflows, Whittstable Oyster Festival was ruined in Kent because people got norovirus after eating the seafood there. And while it's not been proven that definitely came from sewage pollution, there is a correlation there and that is what the fisheries said probably happened. Shellfish like oysters and mussels and clams, they filtrate the water to get their nutrients to eat. The contaminated water passes through them and then they can catch the disease. I mean, they don't catch as in get symptoms, the diseased water, the bacteria, the viruses, they can remain in the shellfish. And yes, again, this year it's been found that sewage has been discharged into the areas where we farm our shellfish. So it could decimate our seafood industry if it's not checked. Is this just a problem in the UK? I mean, how does our water quality these days compare to elsewhere in Europe and in the world? There are other countries in Europe that have got a better kind of record than us on it. We are at the bottom of the league table at the moment. In 2020, we were at the last time we had to data for in terms of bathing status water quality. In 2020, 17% of our rivers and coastal areas that were given bathing status were of excellent quality and that compares to about 80% of other countries in Europe. Poland is nearly as bad as ours. They're about 22%. But we have to also bear in mind that globally, 80% of wastewater isn't properly treated. So yeah, globally, it is a problem. But I think that we could definitely be doing a lot better in the UK. I think this is one question that might be on everyone's minds at the moment. Why is this being allowed to happen? Why hasn't the investment been made? I mean, I can't go and chuck whatever I want into a river. Why is it that water companies have been getting away with putting so much sewage in them? So actually under EU law, it's not really allowed to happen. So their law is that water companies are only allowed to spill untreated sewage into the waterways under exceptional circumstances. So after a big storm or after an exceptional failure of the system. However, the issue is that undercuts the environment agency which happened over the last decade. Water companies monitor their own sewage spills in this country. So in a way, they mark their own homework and that means that it's possible for them to cover it up. Also, the investment hasn't happened. Some argue that's partly due to our privatised system. We're one of the only countries in the world with a privatised water system. Even government ministers have said that they want to reduce the amount that shareholders get paid and that CEOs get in bonuses if they fail on pollution targets. But actually, ministers don't currently have the powers to do that. Of what the regulator does, but it hasn't so far. And actually, speaking of Ofwat, you mentioned them in a recent piece of yours where MPs and charities claimed the water companies were being given a licence to leak by the regulator Ofwat. And in response, a spokesperson for Ofwat said that they have been imposing fines and penalties and secured spending commitments totalling over £339 million specifically for failure on leakage. They also said that they'll continue to hold them to account. We'll have to wait and see whether that does actually happen. But I wanted to know, for the sewage that's now already in our waterways, is there anything we can do to fix it? So eventually the nutrients etc will break down and they'll be diluted by being in the sea. So there's not too many worries about that, I don't think. I mean, obviously, that can still affect ocean life, but it won't be there forever. However, there are certainly some things like wet wipes, microplastics and other waste that goes out with the sewage that will stay in the ocean and not break down. So, yeah, definitely in terms of the plastic waste that's flushed and the drain, that is a problem and it can't really be cleaned up at the moment. Well, Helena, that has been disturbing and disgusting, but I'm glad that you've come on and told us about it. Thank you so much. Thank you for having me. Thanks again to Helena Horton. We've put a link to all The Guardian's coverage of this story on the podcast web page at theguardian.com. And that's it for today. The producer was me, Madeline Finley, with additional production by Jackie Wakefield. The sound design was by Rudy Zagatlo and the executive producer was Max Sanderson. We'll be back on Thursday. See you then.