 There have been so many moments that should have been watershed moments for Australia on this issue and so many women who have had and it has been mostly women who have had to stand up and explain their pain and have their stories told and picked apart and questioned before we got to this point. Hello lovely people and podcasts and welcome to the show. You are with Catherine Murphy, the host and with me is my absolutely splendiferous and marvellous team. Amy Romaker, Sarah Martin and Paul Carr. Sounding absolutely pro and you are on one of our now regular episodes which we are, what do we call these? Ask me anything. Ask me anything, thank you. So thank you for all of the questions that rolled in today on the socials. We'll go through the legal ones or the ones that won't get us into defamation territory but no seriously thank you for all of the input. I think you've given us lots of things to chew over for the next sort of half hour or so. So we're going to start with Sarah and a question from Adam Logan. Yes, straight in. Adam, thank you for this question Adam Logan. Why is Scott Morrison's approval currently at 55%? 57%. There you go, 57%. So you know, he's on the money. Give or take. Well, I mean you can look at this from two ways. Like are we looking at that and saying 55% is very high or are we looking at saying 55% is very low because the answer to the question probably either way you look at it is women is the problem. That's why we've seen it drop quite significantly. So it was a lot higher. I mean people might be asking why it's still at 55%. I think there was from the tone, I mean Twitter obviously is not the best environment for tone spotting but I do think it was more surprised like why is it at that level given the last five weeks. That's how I took it. Apologies Adam, you'll be in touch. Well that's the answer. It's probably men because men don't seem to mind much as to what's been happening in the past couple of months if you look at the breakdown in the essential poll that Murph reported on a Monday, sorry was it Monday? Yeah it was Monday. Yeah. Tuesday. Tuesday. Oh God I can't remember. Anyway, the latest Guardian in the central poll. The support among women has dropped quite substantially but for men it hasn't really moved around that much which I think is really interesting and it's going to be I guess interesting to see whether that moves further in the next one or whether that 55% is a base from which the Prime Minister can start to recover but it clearly shows that the gloss has come off. The gloss has come off but also why do we think it's, you know, what are the sort of attributes and this is not a fair question really for Sarah because Sarah's been off for a little while tending to a new baby and we're absolutely delighted to welcome her back but I think maybe the rest of us will be acutely conscious of the preceding 12 months and the story of the last 12 months. Has COVID given him a bedrock do you think the Prime Minister? So I mean that would be my view. Yeah he comes off a high base because of the handling of COVID. He recovered at the start of last year from terrible poll numbers due to the bushfires and then because of handling of COVID, a better health response than almost anyone in the world and a quicker economic recovery in the back half of the year. Yeah he's obviously popular although interestingly less popular than the state premiers in most of the world. That's been a phenomenon throughout. Yeah I mean he also has name recognition when people look at those polls too like they recognize Scott Morrison as the Prime Minister and we can't underestimate the impact of having an hour a day press conference you know pretty much to lay out the COVID response for most of last year and what that would have done in terms of that name recognition. He's a known quantity and I think when people look at those questions they go I know who that bloke is. I do wonder though whether we're going to see the same sort of Scott Morrison effect on the next election that we saw on the last election. Is Scott Morrison's personal popularity enough to drag the coalition over the line again as he did at the last election when he wasn't a known quantity and I think that's the question a lot of people are going to be asking themselves as we get closer to the election whenever that is. Which is a bit of a segue actually to Harry Larson's question which is the next cab off the rank which Sarah's going to lead on. Is Morrison's leadership safe until the election? I mean it's sort of like hilarious question to ask really in some respects from where we've been. Not for Australian politics it's not. No no no well not for Australian politics and obviously this question has been posed in the light of events in the light over the last six weeks so Sarah going to take a punt. Look I think yes he is safe until the next election but I don't think that means we can underestimate the grumblings about his performance in recent times. I think Scott Morrison was seen as he pulled off quite a coup with the last election that no one expected him to pull off. So he has the support of his party room and it has been a fairly united party room and he's been able to get everyone on the same page in a way that Tony Abbott and Malcolm Turnbull were never able to do. So yes I do think he is safe and I mean who knows what will happen between now and the next election and you never say never in this business particularly what we've seen over the past decade. But yes I think at this stage they think he's fluffed it. It hasn't been Morrison at his best. It could get worse, it could get better but at the moment I don't think there's any serious moves to remove him it's just grumbles. Anyone? I would agree with that with one caveat which is that unlike the Labour side where there isn't a clear challenge at Anthony Albanese there is a clear successor to Scott Morrison in Josh Frydenberg and so while I agree that having saved them at the last election and having led through Covid means that absolutely they would want to keep him in place I would just say that things could move quickly if you know there's an obvious person to move to if he's not able to recover the government's position but that's a bit speculative. I think he's got a lot of challenges, got the vaccine rollout which is not going to plan as we know and the Guardians looked at the data on that and we're well behind the planned targets and metrics. You've got the coalition starting to rumble in the party room about energy policy again. You've got the Nats who are starting to like jump up and say hey we're still here and causing a bit of trouble in the party room again. You've lost Craig Kelly so you've lost a number there. We don't know what's going to happen to Andrew Lamming in the next couple of weeks, months or whatever which you know depending on whether or not you count Tony Smith as a number for the government puts them at you know 75 and not necessarily having all of the voting numbers on the House. There's a lot of things outside of the past six weeks which is sort of funneling up for Scott Morrison and his main skill has been dismissing a lot of criticisms and issues and just deflecting but we're now reaching I think that critical point where he can't anymore and I think how he responds to what's happening within his own party is going to dictate how the next couple of months go and that's before we even get into the budget. Yes which is creeping up on us. Yes, whether we like it or not. Okay from Tim Fitzsimmons again Sarah's going to lead in this one. This is a hard question Tim. Thanks a bunch mate. In which seats will the next federal election be won and lost and what is likely to be the top issue that will decide people's vote in marginal seats? No pressure or anything. Go for it. Well I mean how long have we got because this is not a straightforward answer but I mean I think you know the election will be won and lost in key in a handful of seats. I don't think at this stage we're looking like you know we're in landslide territory even though some may suggest otherwise. We're looking at Queensland and we're looking at northern Tasmania. That is certainly where the election will be won or lost in my opinion. The issues in those seats we've heard already from Anthony Albanese again at this conference and the government as well in this space. This is going to be about jobs, it's going to be about economic recovery in the wake of the COVID downturn which is really interesting ground which is traditionally the coalition's strong suit so there is some nervousness that if you're going to be fighting an election on the economy that automatically plays into the hands of the conservative side of politics but Labour is very focused on secure jobs, better employment and there's fertile ground there particularly with what happens with JobKeeper ending. You've got 150,000 people potentially out of work. What that means, how that flows through and how many of those are in the seats that matter. So I think it's going to be about jobs. I'll hand over to my co-chair, Anthony, the Queensland expert, which particular seats in Queensland? Well Queensland is a difficult one because the coalition is absolutely at capacity at Queensland. I mean they've got what is it, 23 of the 30 seats or something like that. That's not to say though that Labour is going to necessarily retain all of the seats they've got there. I mean Lily is another seat that's still kind of on the bubble there but then you've got Lycart in Cairns which Warren Ench has which is also in danger for the coalition because when you look at JobKeeper ending this week, Queensland went into lockdown right before the Easter holidays and everyone I am speaking to at home is talking about just how awful it is for all of the tourism operators and that is a huge issue in Queensland. Then you look at places like Flynn which is in central Queensland where Labour has got what they hope is a pretty strong candidate and mining is no longer as big an issue in Queensland as it was at the last election. So it's a really unknown quantity what is going to happen there. I mean Labour needs to win what is it, six, seven seats but the coalition has to win everything that it's already got. It can't afford to lose more than four seats or it's we're in minority government just on those numbers. So I think that Queensland will play a role but I agree with Sarah it's northern Tasmania and I also think WA is going to be a pretty big surprise in this election not just from the state election results but also as Sarah has pointed out in the office several times this week, the coalition have lost all of their big names in WA and that has a huge impact on brand awareness and where people decide to put their vote. Yeah WA is genuinely interesting. I think Paul unless you've got a burning thought we should just because I've got a long list here and I want to get through as many of the questions as I can. We are going to go to Paul now because Sarah flagged vaccinations and that seems like a neat segue I think to go there. So a question from Wendy Little. Why have four million Australians not been vaccinated as promised? Yes, so the original promise was four million by the end of March instead we only got to about 600,000 so missed it by quite a bit and the two reasons are vaccine supply and then the rate at which doses are administered. So on vaccine supply Australia's rollout is in the first step is imports of Pfizer and AstraZeneca for overseas and now that CSL has started producing AstraZeneca it's now moving into domestic production but the issue was very heavily reliant in the first stage on the imports and rather than an initial burst we got more of a trickle. The EU and Italy stopped some exports of AstraZeneca. Brendan Murphy the Health Department Secretary said earlier in March we were supposed to have 3.8 million doses of AstraZeneca by then but instead we only had 700,000. So first of all it's just an issue of not having enough jobs to put in people's arms and then there is the rate at which they're being administered so the difficulty with setting up GP clinics and making appointments. The floods in New South Wales caused an issue. There are also the states are rolling them out at different rates being conservative about whether they hold back a second dose or whether the Commonwealth is doing that for them. So the pace is also not what would be desired as well. Yeah okay well that covers the nuts and bolts to lead Paul but everyone have weigh in on this one. This one is from Kylie, you don't have a surname. Is the government being held accountable for what's happening in the vaccination program? Yes, I think Labor has done a good job of pointing out that the government raised expectations, no one forced them to set this 4 million target and as these supply issues were happening the government was claiming that it wasn't going to slow the roll out down which just didn't seem possible but then when they had to push back the target or give up on the target they said oh well there's been an interrupted supply. So I think that they have had difficulty explaining that the October date that everyone will have been that it will be fully vaccinated by October will also stick in people's minds. They had to water that down from fully vaccinated meaning two doses to oh you'll be fully protected but that means you'll only have your first dose. So I think that that date will also stick in people's minds not just the 4 million number. Yeah the others, you guys just thoughts like I just slightly interpret Kylie's question here a little bit just on this accountability point. I think sort of what sits underneath the question that we're being asked is will the dynamic that sort of prevailed last year which is a certain amount of well not cutting slack that's ridiculous because that didn't happen but a certain amount of look this is a really big crisis that we face got to cut them a bit of slack when things don't go according to plan or entirely within their control. I think there was a forgiveness a level of resting forgiveness in the electorate last year about some of this stuff. Vaccination is a big high profile thing that the Commonwealth is responsible for. What do we think about that in terms of the accountability dynamic Sarah? I think it's really interesting because last year what we saw and this is probably part of the equation is we saw sort of a suspension of politics as usual. So there was sort of this detente between the states and the federal government that they weren't going to get stuck into each other over lockdowns and travel bans and border closures etc. And that took a little while to find its equilibrium but that was sort of the prevailing climate last year. It's interesting with this we saw this morning for example some federal government MPs come out and have a crack at the states for the vaccine rollout which obviously stoked the ire of the state leaders and then Morrison very quickly backtracked on that rhetoric in his press conference today. So in terms of like I guess the way that the states and the federal government are interacting with each other I think there is a – that seems to be changing and perhaps that is reflecting the fact that people are expecting this to happen so life can get back to normal. Life is not back to normal yet. We've got this new lockdown in Queensland. Is there a shift in how people are expecting governments on both sides to respond? Like a patient. Yeah. Their patients has been tested. Yeah exactly. I mean. Well I think that people are looking around the world at vaccine rollouts at countries that didn't do as well as containing the initial pandemic and they are seeing large amounts of the population be vaccinated you know a few hiccups but fairly smoothly and it's happening on schedule or ahead of schedule it's happening in an ordered fashion. It's just sort of being rolled out and we keep being told by the federal government that we need to look to the rest of the world and say aren't we lucky because we didn't go through what they did with COVID but now we're looking at the rest of the world going well where are my vaccinations. I mean when you look at the early numbers take the UK as an example of a country that didn't do so well in the initial response. When you look at the initial numbers of how the UK rollout went out in their first week or so they had four point something of the percent of the population vaccinated. Australia had about one percent. Like we're just not managing to roll it out at the same rate and they've had issues with booking systems. They've had issues as Paul says with raising expectations and now we're hearing the oh it's the states to blame and the states including the very jickly in government the same side of politics as the federal government are actually saying you know what no like we're not getting what we need from the federal government. And I think unless we see some sort of ordered national cabinet response to this this is going to go on for for quite some time and I don't think that people have the patience for that. Oh I think I think the simple answer to the accountability questions. Yeah and it's not just the federal state dynamic it's also the the labor coalition dynamic that Anthony Albanese offered bipartisanship last year but on vaccines has basically declared open season shortly before Christmas he said you know why are they accelerating the timetable and now it's it's all there to play for why do we only have the two vaccines you know all of those things are things they criticize the government for. Exactly now I want to do this next one quickly because we've got a chunk of the conversation that Amy is going to lead that's quite substantial so I just want to leave a swing room for that but I'm really interested actually in this question again from Harry Larson who says vaccines aside are we deluding ourselves about what sort of world exists post COVID where will the no go go zones be globally and will there be ongoing implications for travel and airlines and the rest it's sort of again I think translating this question just means like are we kind of delusional to think that we get the jab and then it's all just back to how it was sort of at the end of 2019 so what do you reckon Paul? Well it depends how quickly we get the vaccines to developing countries I mean there are efforts to collectivize that through the COVAX system and there's also a suggestion maybe they should waive the IP so that they can be produced. Push it out faster. Push it out faster. Let's assume that we don't do that and there's you know still large pockets of COVID around I think you're probably more likely to have a list of banned countries that you know Australia or other countries don't allow people to come in from but maybe once our own citizens have been vaccinated we'll allow them to travel out into the rest of the world and come back and it also depends on whether or not there are more you know variations of concern and how aggressive those changes are and whether the vaccines protect against those because we might see a situation where you have to rejig and reformulate the vaccines for the new strains and the Pfizer mRNA can do that quite quickly. AstraZeneca can be tweaked but that will take longer. CSL has said that they you know are going to be rolling out the you know let's call it AstraZeneca 1.0 for all of this year and couldn't really be doing that until next year so it really depends whether you see that sort of variation. Hmm, nope, nope we're good. I think that's a good summary. The only other thing I would add to it in terms of airlines and travel and stuff is learned behaviour during COVID. Like I seriously wonder what on earth is going to happen to business travel after this pandemic. I mean maybe in a couple of years time everybody just loves to you know sort of go off on a day-long trip in order to do a conference meeting in another city or whatever else maybe we just snap back to that at some point but I really wonder about that whether the market has sort of semi-permanently fallen out of that because of technology and other things but anyway that's a whole other. It would be a brave friend to be the first person in your social circle to have a destination wedding after COVID. That's true. Like who's going to have the first destination wedding? That is true, that is true anyway. So anyway hopefully we covered that one off now Amy from Ian Maddox. Maddox, forgive me Ian. Do any allegations around sexual misconduct a coalition problem or do Labor and the Greens have the same issues? Labor and the Greens absolutely have the same issues. This isn't one side of politics or one side of society or you know just even one side of the people that you know this is something that permeates everything and everybody and every household and every political party. The reason I think that we're hearing this time about what is happening in the coalition or what is alleged to have happened in the coalition is because there doesn't seem to have been many instances where these allegations have been addressed before that they've become public that there's been a lot of effort to kind of go you know this is something that we need to look at as a cultural problem and I think also they've been in government for quite some time and they are responsible for what is happening in for their own party inside the building. They have the authority there. They've been in government for eight or so years. Parliament House operates by you know what the government wants to happen and so when you're talking about you know staffers and things like that you do tend to look at what's happening at the government because they are the people who are in power. We know that the Greens have had issues in the past that's been public. We know that Labor have had issues. We know that there are social media groups where women are talking about behavior and allegations of abuse and assault that have happened to them. We also know that about a year ago Labor started looking at their own processes for dealing with this with these allegations and they're currently going through that. I think the issue is who is speaking why they're speaking and what is being done to address what they're raising and I think the last six weeks in particular has been because the response has not been to the satisfaction of the people who have been raising these allegations and raising these issues. That's a good point. I think it's also I mean it is a cultural moment and it is I think perhaps because of how shocking the Brittany Higgins case and allegation was it has sort of shocked the system as sort of it's one of those you know black swan moments or one of those watersheds where because it was sort of like cut through and because of the it was just so horrific and shocking and universal. It sort of opened the floodgates. So I think I mean I don't think they underestimate the importance of that particular event in sort of you know shocking the system and then that sort of allowing all these other complaints and incidents to come out. I mean I have only been back at work for the past week so you guys have been covering this in my absence. So your thoughts are far more interesting and relevant but from being on the outside it sort of seemed to me that it was sort of a shock to the system and then everything comes tumbling down. She sort of has seen an amazing way and possibly not in a way that she necessarily intended created this kind of space that others can now occupy by Brittany Higgins I mean Paul. Yeah I was going to agree with Amy that while all parties have this problem that it's about whether or not the complaints are treated seriously and you know Brittany Higgins herself has said that you know the perception of hypocrisy that Scott Morrison standing on stage with Grace Tame and the feeling that her complaint was never taken seriously was what most of motivated her. I think the reason the questioner asked this is you know why do we see more public complaints at the moment on one side. Perhaps that's because Labor's new process is dealing with this behind the scenes and we might see outcomes of that in future and punishments made it out to people but you know it could just be staffers that are sacked and never heard from again and don't become a public story. Labor also has you know more women in the party because of their quota system and you know perhaps that critical mass means that there's a while it's a problem in every party. There is closer to zero tolerance for that in Labor. Still not zero but closer. Just think on an organizational level Labor is better at dealing with these things they sort of historically seem to have a better sort of structure or process more centralized it enables them to deal with problems more easily. I wonder too and you know just for any listeners you know understand that we know this is an all sides problem and I think it should be clear to people that anybody who wants to bring stories forward they will be treated with a great deal of seriousness. But I wonder myself a little whether party discipline is an issue here too that there's I agree exactly what Paul said about there is a culture of feminism in Labor that does not exist in the coalition at the moment. That's a fact that is just a fact but I wonder myself whether because obviously there is a much the liberal and national parties have a more tolerant for you know people coming out of the cupboard saying various things I don't mean that literally but you know what I mean it's a more free range culture whereas in Labor it's much more a collectivist culture and whether yeah anyway we shall see in the fullness of time whether party disciplines a factor here or not. Well I would just only add to that Labor are going through their processes and as we know from you know public statements it's all very confidential at the moment we don't even know if complaints have been made. I think the test for Labor is going to be the response and whether the people who have bought the allegations after an investigation are satisfied with the response. Absolutely right. And I think at the end of that process there is the possibility that we will hear more about this from Labor if people do not feel that they've been taken seriously by the party. No absolutely. Now from Chris I don't know the surname Chris apologies is here's the big question is the huge question have young women like Grace Tame and Britton Higgins really turned the tide Amy. I mean they definitely has been identified have caused a moment here and it's been I think pushed on by the accusations which have been strenuously denied by Christian Porter as well and the response to that there is a very loud chorus of voices mostly young women who are refusing to be silenced and refusing to be pat pat on the head and told to go off and be good girls and let the adults deal with it. I think we also need to acknowledge that there is a long long list of people who have gone before who have raised these issues and that their voices have been so important to the conversation. We've had Chelsea Potter, Danya Mani, Rachelle Miller has spoke on the culture and the powerlessness of staffers before. We've had Emma Hussar raise you know issues with party culture and parliament culture. We've had Saxon Mullins. We've had Haley Foster. We've had Sherline Campbell. We've had Jess McGuire, Nessa Turnbull Roberts. We've had Dr. Yeez Rees. We've had so many people come forward and say we need to deal with this and I think we do need to examine why now that we have a face that we're starting to say okay yes and why we weren't having some of these conversations when we've had atrocities happen for decades. I mean when we've had the Hannah Clark case, when we had Courtney Herron, Lynette Daly, you know Michaelia Dunn who's going through the courts now. There have been so many moments that should have been watershed moments for Australia on this issue and so many women who have had and it has been mostly women who have had to stand up and explain their pain and have their stories told and picked apart and questioned before we got to this point and I am so glad that we're here. I'm really really glad that we're here and that we are seeing the response that we are but we are still seeing people being torn down for telling their stories and I just think we need to move beyond that. We do need action but we also need the leaders of this country to stand up and say free speech doesn't mean that you get to tear down a person who is telling you something uncomfortable about your society. Beautifully said, anyone got anything to add to that? Here, here all I would add is parliament reflects culture and I think the alleged rape of a woman in parliament house made people notice that there was something rotten in the culture. And it has resonated because again of the universality of the experience, it's a horrible incident but so many people in Australian society have either direct experience with this or indirect experience with it which is why it's carried in this instance. But Amy's point about why now is sort of an imponderable really, I've been thinking about this a lot myself, I don't really know why now, I'm just grateful for it. Paul, you want to say something? Yeah, it certainly feels like it has the momentum of a runaway freight train and the political actors that have acted as if it will blow over, have been run over like Andrew Lamming thought a preemptive apology would work but then sent messages where he said he didn't know what he was even apologizing for and it wasn't a one-day story. He was promising to leave parliament within three or four days and some of the political management of the issue has caused more problems for the government and so a short-term approach to it assuming that it would run out of steam hasn't worked. That's why you've now got inquiries into whether the PMO was briefing against Brittany Higgins' partner and that sort of thing. Yeah, it's sort of the heavy-handedness hasn't yielded the desired result. Now we've only got a couple of minutes kids so let's be snappy and Greg Kenny asks a question for our age, why are people so unkind? Who wants this? Come on. We were defeated by your question Greg. We'd like to answer you. Come on Sarah, you're a kind person. Well, I don't know the answer to that Greg but we have a chocolate drawer in our office. We're kind. It's a secure building but you're welcome at any point. I think people are unkind because they feel powerless and you often see this on social media where people are just completely rude, especially to female journalists but are completely rude because they don't think that anyone sees them and then if you know sometimes if you respond, reminding them that you're a human and that they shouldn't be abusing you or that acknowledging that they have an issue even if they've expressed it in a very offensive and confrontational way then they can suddenly be a lot politer. I mean some people are permanently unhinged. Sometimes you can be surprised that when you... Make a connection. Can unleash the inner human, a small one. I remember I used to ride my bike around London and you always used to cop abuse for whatever reason and someone said to me the trick is to make eye contact and make connection and then people remember that there's a human on that bus. I don't think that people are inherently unkind. I think there is a lot of kindness and I think a lot of the great acts of kindness and generosity are usually shown by those who know what it's like to live in an unkind situation or live somewhere where things aren't quite as generous for them. They have a little bit more of empathy for people from their own experience. I think what Paul says is right that people who are unkind, it's because they feel powerless or they're not being seen. I think some people are unkind because they feel like something is being taken from them when power structures or societal norms are being shaken and they feel like they're going to lose their place and maybe they just feel like they got there and like, hey, I've worked hard to get to this point, why do I now need to help somebody else up? We're all creatures of our own experiences and we're all a sum of our own parts. But I think by and large, if you can just remember that we are all just trying to do our best and maybe just be a little bit more forgiving of people when they stumble, we might see that kindness spread a little bit further. Mandatory empathy training. Exactly. Exactly. And the perfect note to end the show. Thank you so very much for listening. We really do appreciate it. Thank you to my team who you can hear are absolutely stellar. Thank you to the executive producer of the show Miles Martagnone. Thank you to Anna Isard. You know the drill. Leave us a rating review. Tell all your friends. Share the port, etc. We'll be back with you next week.