 Hi, I'm Laura Murphy-Oates, or as I'm sometimes called on this podcast, Murph Jr. Catherine Murphy is away this week, but she is covering the Eden Monero by-election this weekend. So we thought you would like to hear her colleague Paul Karp go through some of the major issues in this electorate, which funnily enough, are some of the major issues in politics in Australia right now. I spoke to Paul on our other podcast, Full Story. Here it is. In Eden Monero and the many, many communities that make up the electorate of Eden Monero, they have also experienced more than most, more than many, these terrible hardships. So Paul, why should we care about the Eden Monero by-election? We should care about this election because it's the first test of post-pandemic politics, you know, how COVID as an issue plays at elections. But more than that, Eden Monero has just survived catastrophic bushfires over the summer. So it's a test about whether people feel that government has looked after them through those disasters. Whether it's fires, droughts or the one you can't see, and that is COVID-19, it has had a devastating impact on businesses, on families, on communities, right across this very diverse part of the country. Ravaged by the twin crises of the bushfires, then the pandemic, the electorate of Eden Monero now heads to the polls in what will be Australia's first election after a turbulent summer. And over the course of the next few weeks and whenever the by-election is held, there will be that opportunity to affirm a positive and optimistic way back. The build back that is occurring right across, not just the communities of Eden Monero, but right across Australia. Today, what's at stake in the Eden Monero by-election? It's Friday, the 3rd of July. Okay, Paul, so where did this all start? It starts with the Labor member for Eden Monero, Mike Kelly. Paul Karp is a political reporter for Guardian Australia. Who many people might remember as a former military officer, turned MP, you know, with a large moustache representing this marginal electorate. Old soldiers rarely give up. A lot of tough times. Sometimes they simply break down. It has broken my heart to have to do this. It's gut wrenching. In April, he made an announcement. People are aware, I think, that I've been going through some health issues. He called time on his career because of health issues. These are all service related, going back to my time in the Army. In the last few weeks, the Department of Veterans Affairs has classified me as permanently impaired due to a deteriorating osteoarthritis situation. We talked about the difficulty of representing such a large electorate, you know, driving around such a large electorate to see all parts and represent all voices there. And also for family reasons, wanting to spend time with his wife. I would have continued on if I felt I could have done the job to the extent that it has to be done in Eden Monero. It's just not the seat it went with. It's larger than 66 countries in Eden Monero these days. It's 42,000 square kilometres of rough terrain, difficult weather, incredibly diverse, incredibly challenging with a community that's spread out. Okay, Paul, what can you tell us about the electorate of Eden Monero? The middle of the electorate is Queenbyan, which is a regional city in New South Wales just on the outskirts of Canberra. And then it stretches all the way down to the south coast, so Bega, Mirimbula, the Monero region, the Snowys, including Cooma, and more recently a redistribution means that it wraps the entire way around the ACT, including Tumut and Yass in the northwest. And what can you tell us about what it's like there? What's the important things we need to know about it? It has a mix of, you know, quite wealthy pockets, thinking like, you know, public servants coming from commuter towns like Bungondor and Yass and Queenbyan into Canberra and, you know, sea changes that live on the south coast. But there are also pockets of intense rural poverty in places like Cabargo and Captain's Flat. So it's a very diverse electorate, takes in a whole bunch of different industries, things like logging, dairy and cattle farming, you know, apple orchards at Batlow, tourism. So yeah, tree changes, tree huggers, primary producers and retirees and public servants, big mix. And what about this seat politically? Where is it sat in the political spectrum? Well Eden Monero is famously the great bellwether seat of Australian politics. The electorate's been always been a marginal seat, a traditional bellwether seat. From every election from 1972 until very recently it went with the party that won the election. That streak was broken in 2016 when Mike Kelly won the seat back for Labor, but Labor didn't form government. For the first time in almost 40 years, the litmus test electorate of Eden Monero has gone against the national trend. And I think it's quite interesting that it's gone from being front page news, marginal seat at every electorate, big focus of the election, to at the 2019 election, quite neglected because Mike Kelly had a strong personal vote. Both parties were quite convinced he was going to win it and there was much more focus on the neighbouring seat of Gilmore. But then Fiona Cottvoy's, the Liberal candidate, came within a few hundred votes of winning it on the back of an anti-Labor swing. So it flew under the radar despite being a real tussle for many decades. Okay, so this is a seat that traditionally has been seen as nationally significant. People once looked to it to gauge who might win government. And at the last election in 2019, it was pretty close. How has this by-election played out? So on the coalition side, this kicked off a rather intense pre-selection process. Andrew Constance, the state Liberal MP for Bega, he threw his hat in the ring but immediately pulled out with the day later. They say a day is a long time in politics. I am going to be seeking pre-selection. Today he's out. I want to apologise for the confusion and anyone who's been upset. A backflip worthy of an Olympic medal, Andrew Constance finalising one of the shortest political campaigns in history. John Barolaro, the New South Wales Deputy Premier of the National, also wanted to get into the race, was told not to to leave it for Constance, sent a barrage of text messages complaining about the way he'd been treated to the Nationals federal leader Michael McCormack, but also didn't end up in the race. It seemed like at one point there was a new candidate every minute. There was a few days there where there was just constant news about these candidates, like, well, yeah, I mean, the coalition got off to a really poor start by making the first story of the by-election campaign sort of infighting about who was going to run for the seat. What ended up happening? When both those two senior New South Wales figures indicated they wouldn't contest it. And the candidate that our party has chosen here locally across the electorate, Dr Fianna Kotwoys, who stood for us at the last federal election. Fianna Kotwoys, who fell about 1700 votes short of winning the seat, but got a swing of about 2% to her, she was in the box seat to be pre-selected on the back of that performance. And importantly, she has the local understanding having been born and bred here, having served here as a volunteer, whether it be in the Cabargo bushfire brigade or serving in life now. What can you tell us about Fianna? Fianna is a development expert who has a farm in the area. The ads also stress small businesswoman, former teacher and volunteer work for the rural fire service. I mean, Dr Kotwoys has experience and qualifications that people would spend a lifetime aspiring to, let alone achieving. And this is exactly what even Manera needs right now. She lives on a family farm in Diggams Creek, which is near Cabargo. And a big part of her personal story is about defending her property and having seen the ravages of black summer bushfires firsthand. Like thousands of others, Fianna Kotwoys' property wasn't spared by the black summer bushfires. Everyone had burnt five kilometres of fences, a lot of our pasture. We stayed and defended and we were able to save our home and all of our buildings. What about Labor? Where did they land with their candidate? Labor picked their candidate pretty quickly. Anthony Albanese, through his support behind Bega Mayor Kristy McBain. And so she had the nomination stitched up pretty quickly. So she remained prominent in the local area through the bushfires, communicating with constituents through things like Facebook Live videos. Yesterday was one of the most challenging in our Shires history, with great impact also felt by neighbours to the south, north and west of this Shire. She stepped aside as Mayor to contest the election. The ongoing bushfire emergency has tragically claimed the lives of some great people and the homes and businesses of many more. So these two candidates were really in the thick of it this summer fighting the bushfires. Can you remind us about the impact these bushfires had on the region? Yeah, so Eden Manera was one of the region's hardest hit by the black summer bushfires. More than a million hectares burned, thousands of kilometres of fencing destroyed. People left homeless in communities like Kibago, which you might remember. How come we only had four trucks to defend our town? Because our town doesn't have a lot of money, but we have hearts of gold, Mr Prime Minister. No, you're an idiot, mate. Is the town where Scott Morrison tried to visit after the Hawaii holiday and got heckled and people refusing handshakes? You really are. Don't get any boats down here, buddy. No liberal boats. You're out, son. You are out. The south of the electorate was threatened by the fire coming up from Malacuda in Victoria. Extraordinary fire behaviour. We saw the border fire, which we inherited from Victoria, blew up. You might remember images of people stranded on the wharf at Eden as smoke blocked out the sun. Stay by the water where you have at least a level of safety. We can jump in. That's it. The water run, then. So frustration, am I right? Oh, are you right? Yes, you sure are. And even parts of the electorate that weren't directly affected by bushfires were covered in smoke over the summer. Now hundreds of people, they're still living in tents and caravans, living in burnt out properties, waiting for their properties to be cleared or to get more permanent shelter. There are concerns that the money that's been raised or in the government's bushfire fund hasn't flowed to people quick enough. It's going to be interesting to see, you know, whether people are angry at the government about the way they handled this issue or whether the way that they've handled COVID lets them off the hook slightly, dealing with that second crisis to hit the economy a lot better. So Christy McBain is campaigning on people have been left behind. The government hasn't done enough for the area. Fiona Kotvoy argues, well, I'll get more done because I'll be in government and that will help us recover from the bushfires and COVID-19 quicker. Right. And what about the big contributing factor to these bushfires, climate change? Where do the two candidates stand on that? Well, climate change is an important issue for the electorate. And in part, that's yes, because it increases the intensity of bushfires. There was a poll commissioned by GetUp that suggested six in 10 voters don't think the coalition is doing enough on that issue. Christy McBain, her views are in line with the rest of the Labor Party. She accepts that climate change increases the intensity of bushfires and she wants to see more ambitious climate reduction targets. And in the campaign, she has said that, you know, her views haven't changed just because there's a by-election, which is a bit of a dig at the Liberal candidate Fiona Kotvoy, who has said some interesting things about climate change in the past. What do you mean? So Fiona Kotvoy has a long track record of playing down the role of humans in contributing to climate change. You know, she said that solar activity is the primary driver. She said it's a myth and that it increases cyclones and that the risk to Pacific nations is overstated because one Pacific nation, Tuvalu, has increased landmass. She is opposed to, you know, green tape and thinks that land clearing is a good way to reduce fuel load to prevent the intensity of bushfires. You have submission to the Royal Commission on bushfires. You've mentioned a lot about hazard reduction and resilience strategies, but you make no mention of climate change for the carbon emissions. Why is that? And, you know, more recently she made a submission to the Bushfire Royal Commission saying that governments can't address heat as a cause of bushfires, so they have to focus on managing fuel loads instead. So in the area where I live, the key thing is hazard reduction and that's a critical factor. The submission I made is about my experience in my area. And I really welcome the fact that we have a Royal Commission and that the Royal Commission is looking at the reasons for the fires from Queensland. Right, this has been a common refrain from the government post the bushfire crisis, this focus on the fuel loads. And some people have critiqued that as a way of not talking about climate change. Yeah, the feeling is that just talking about mitigation and adaptation leaves out of the conversation that we're supposed to be reducing our emissions so that climate change won't be as severe as predicted and won't contribute to more intense and more frequent bushfires. Do you believe that climate change had an impact on the intensity of this year's fires? I'm looking forward to the outcomes from the Royal Commission because that is looking at all of those reasons and I'm really pleased that the terms of reference specifically identified that the Royal Commission would look at the impact of climate change. Do you personally believe that climate change was a factor in the like summer bushfires in this region? So I can speak about the our area because that's where I was fighting the fires with the RFS. That's where I was defending our home and our property. That's where the fires actually rolled through our farm. How are these statements from Fiona are pretty extraordinary and do put a further to the right than some in a party on climate change. Definitely different from the messaging from the PM at the moment, right? Well, it seems that she's changed her tune on climate change since running in the by-election. She's clearly aware that she's going to be targeted on this issue. So I believe that the climate is changing and I believe that humans are contributing to that change. She addressed her views and she said, I accept the climate is changing. I accept that humans contribute to climate change. But you know, I've interviewed her and mentioned the previous things about solar flares and cyclones and the land mass of Pacific nations. And she said she still believes all of that. So she hasn't recanted any of her previous views, but she says she now accepts humans contribute to it. So Fiona Coppoy's has changed her tune on climate change. But has her conservative bent become a point of focus in this campaign? Well, yes, I mean, the local climate campaigners have targeted her on the issue, including Matthew Knott, who's the founder of a group called Clean Energy for Eternity. He's warned that she's more conservative on climate change than Tony Abbott, you know, referring to her position on it when she discussed the issue before the 2019 election, saying Australia's contribution to global emissions is minute. So yes, she's been criticized for it. This isn't the only issue where she could be placed as, you know, more conservative than the rest of the Liberal Party and the electorate. So for example, we've reported on the fact that in 2018, Coppoy's made a submission to the religious freedom inquiry, arguing that providers of wedding services should be able to discriminate against same sex couples, parents should be able to withdraw their children from classes teaching, you know, radical gender theory. And those things are slightly out of line with an electorate that voted, you know, two to one in favour of marriage equality in the postal survey. Next, how the future of the government's JobKeeper program became entangled in this election. As you mentioned, this area is recovering from multiple crises. Has that been a defining issue in the election? What have people said about that recovery process? Yes, so because of the fires, you know, and the destruction just ruining the summer holiday season in the south coast, and then moving into the COVID crisis, the economic impact of those two disasters is I think the biggest issue of the campaign. Because the coalitions in government, they have a bit more money to splash around on the issue. They've lost 86 million dollars of recovery packages for primary producers in industries like forestry and apple orchards, which is interesting because those are big industries in Eden Monero. In terms of these measures you're introducing today, actually quite specific and they'll mainly benefit photos in the Monero. So how is this not pork barrelling? I think that's a pretty offensive question to people who have lost everything in bushfires. They don't want to call it pork barrelling, but it's certainly got one eye on the recovery in this particular electorate. These measures are targeted to areas that have been affected by the bushfires. Labor has less money to splash around because whatever the result in the by-election, they're still going to be in opposition. But they've said things like they will reverse cuts to the ABC, which is a big issue in the electorate because of emergency broadcasting and the importance of local news. And of course the success of the project itself. If you've received Treasury's recommendations on the JobKeeper program and you've brought out making a decision on the future of the program until after polls close on Saturday, so is the government concerned about voter backlash in terms of what it does with JobKeeper? We didn't cause the by-election. Another thing that's really important is JobKeeper and the future of economic supports. We have set out a process for making decisions that is about getting the right decisions and taking all the right advice and considering those carefully. And we said that that would be done for the economic statement, which would be done in late July. Can you break that down a bit? Why are these government support payments brought in during the pandemic so essential to this area in particular? It's very important for voters in Eden Monero to know about the future of programs like JobKeeper because businesses can't afford to pay their workers without a wage subsidy and workers are depending on getting $1,500 a fortnight on JobKeeper instead of unemployment benefits. Or people on unemployment benefits need to know whether they're going to get $1,100 a fortnight with the coronavirus supplement or whether that is going to be cut back. Okay, so what do we know about the future of these payments? Well, JobKeeper is a six-month program with payments slated to end in September. But there's been a lot of discussion about whether businesses that have recovered should be taken off the payment. Could the payment go on for too long because we didn't expect the health results would be so good and we'd be coming out of lockdown early. So the government has promised to continue the program until September, but there's still controversy about what it's going to look like after that in terms of whether the hardest-hit industries and regions will get JobKeeper or some other form of support. The government got a review from Treasury about what they should do with this program after September. But when voters go to the polls on Saturday, they won't know the answer to that. The response from the government won't come until about the third week of July when they hand out the mini-budget. What is the government trying to hide from the people of Eden Monero and the people of Australia that they won't release the JobKeeper review before the by-election? But Labor accuses the government of having a secret plan to cut JobKeeper-waved subsidies. The government yesterday made a stunning admission. And Treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers has said that the reason they aren't releasing the review until later in July is that they don't want people to know what they're doing with the payment, whether they're going to be cut off or how it's going to be wound down. The government will receive the review of JobKeeper before the Eden Monero by-election, but they'll keep it secret until afterwards. Okay, is that true that the government has held off on announcing this nationally significant thing due to this election? Should you be releasing that as soon as you get it? I mean, we do have the Eden Monero by-election in this time. Isn't it fair that the JobKeeper review recommendations are released before then? Well, the Finance Minister, Mathias Cormann, has said that's not the reason they're doing it and he told the ABC that they're taking the time to get the response right. Well, we will release them as soon as the decisions are made. I mean, clearly... So, if that's before the economic update in July, if it's before Eden Monero, you'll release them? Well, the decisions will be made prior to the 23rd of July. And as soon as the decisions are made, and when the position to make announcements will make them, absolutely. In a debate with Fiona Cottvoys... We know there's a review that's been done, which is fantastic, but people are anxious to know what's going to happen after September and they have a right to know. Christy McBain has said that the people of Eden Monero have a right to know about what's going to happen to these payments after September, that they're anxious and that businesses and households need to plan for the future. If JobKeeper is cut too soon, the impact on people in this region could be devastating. So, I think there has to be... OK, so it sounds like this is an election where some really big issues of national significance have been debated and have come into play. Has that been reflected in the intensity of this campaign? Yes, it has been an intense and dirty sort of campaign. The other reason Eden Monero has made news is that there's been a vicious disinformation campaign directed at Christy McBain. Emails circulating, purporting to be from Catholic email addresses, which the Catholic Church has completely denied involvement in, that make false claims about McBain and her family members and even suggesting that she's going to pull out of the contest. What has Fiona said about this? Well, Labor's referred the complaints to the police, particularly the one about saying Christy McBain's pulled out of the contest and Fiona Kotvoy's has condemned the misinformation as well. So, it's clearly a dirty tactic, but not one coming from the official campaign. OK, so this is all kicking off this weekend and we should find out the results this weekend as well. How much significance should we give this results in this election? A lot of people have read into the significance of this by-election on a national scale. Yeah, a lot is riding on it. It's a close contest. Insiders think that Labor's ahead, but the Liberals could still win it. There are a lot of unknowns about whether Labor will lose some of its vote because they don't have the personal popularity of Mike Kelly. Our voters are no longer angry about Labor going to the last election proposing increases in taxes. A lot of the Liberal attack ads are reminding people about that and trying to make them angry about that. In terms of the significance of the by-election, if it's a loss for Labor, that would be the first time that a government had won a seat off the opposition in a by-election in 100 years. That would be a big boost for Scott Morrison, whose popularity is very high at the moment because of the handling of the COVID-19 health crisis. And that could start leadership speculation against Labor leader Anthony Albanese. So Labor really wants to win this to kind of head off that instability. For the Morrison government, they're going to be in government regardless of whether they win or lose this. It would just be a huge bonus and cherry on top for their handling of COVID if they were to win. I mean, a lot of people have been talking about this election as the bushfire election, the first election that we've seen since this crisis. There was so much criticism of Scott Morrison and the coalition throughout this time. If they still managed to win this seat, what do you think that says? How will that be taken? Well Scott Morrison has had a roller coaster of a year from the depths of unpopularity for taking a holiday in Hawaii during the bushfire crisis and those scenes in Kibago just showing the community trust in the government response to the bushfires was very, very low. But from that low, he's recovered. His personal popularity is in the high 60s. He's definitely the preferred prime minister over Anthony Albanese in large part because of the handling of the health response to COVID-19. So we won't know which of those issues is more salient to voters, whether they're still upset about the bushfires or whether they want to reward Scott Morrison and the Liberals for their handling of COVID by sending Fiona Cott voice to Canberra. Eden Monero may not be the bellwether of the nation anymore, but it is a hugely significant contest in telling us which of those issues are more important to voters and that could have significance beyond Saturday into the next election. Thanks for listening. We'll be covering the election on the weekend and she'll be back on the podcast next week. If you liked this episode, you may like our other episodes of Full Story. You can find it wherever you're listening to this. This episode was produced by Ellen Lee Beater and Joe Konning. Our executive producers are Miles Martagnone and Gabrielle Jackson. If you liked this episode, don't forget to leave a rating or a review. Catch you next week.