 This is The Guardian. There are a large number of seats where these community independence are going to be active. So I wouldn't assume that if they do get into power that their boats would put a labor government in either. I think there's a real assumption as we watch all this of the intervention on climate by basically progressive philanthropists that the boats automatically see a progressive government. It may well be that they form a base that force the libs and the coalition to come up with something approaching a policy for the 21st century on climate. Hello lovely people. Welcome to the show. You're with Catherine Murphy, the host and political editor of Guardian Australia. And you may just in the distance. It's not really clear to me whether in the pod cave anyone can hear me scream or whether you can hear the constant division bells that are actually ringing just outside us. But we are actually recording the show on the final parliamentary sitting week of the year. So I could not be more delighted to be joined in the pod cave by my dear friend and poll collaborator Peter Lewis. Hi. How are you Catherine? Very good to see you dear. And Peter for folks who don't know him is the director of essential media and also spearheads The Guardian essential poll which we publish each fortnight. And I just thought it was the perfect week really for he and I to get together maybe have a trauma session. Who knows. But to think about the year through the lens of polling because obviously we are coming up for an election year next year. It's just a matter of whether or not the prime minister brings the parliament back or not. You know, my feeling at the moment is we've got a march election or an or a May one. And we will discover in due course after Christmas. But anyway we just thought we would unpack the story of the year through the lens of the data. So what we're going to do is we're going to this Peter May. So look anything could happen. But I'm attempting to put a structure around it by just actually telling the story of the year in order. So we're going to roll back now to the start of this year. Now I don't know about you guys but I have massive trouble with the space time continuum and have done throughout the pandemic. In fact when I was prepping for this app I thought the bushfires were last year. It's kind of insane. But we are actually no we are in year two of the pandemic. The catastrophic bushfires were actually the summer of 2019 20. Then Covid hit we had the whole of 2020 which was Covid dominated 2021 hasn't been much much different. So let's start in February. So it was lovely for me actually prepping. I went back through Peter's columns because he writes a column for us each fortnight with the data. And it just actually put the story of the year together beautifully. But back then February. Right. So we had in that poll we had the 2PP plus which we're going to come back to at the end of this session guys. So listen up we're going to do a refresher on 2PP plus at the end. But what I mean by that is the voting intention data. It basically showed that people were still comfortable with the government's response to the pandemic. But Labor was still in the contest which was sort of surprised as both who were being honest. Really. Right. Yeah. I think 2020 was this fascinating year where there was a decoupling of government performance from voting intention. I think on one level it was because the election was so far down the track. But it was very much also seen as government rather than an individual leader. Although clearly Morrison's approvals reflected a split across partisan lines thought he was doing a good job. So we got to the end of last year and the government would have felt they were in pretty good shape. The economy was reopening. There were a couple of lockdowns over the summer. But you know in February we had 70 percent of voters saying the government was doing a good job in managing the pandemic which was like their first and only test really at that time. But yet Labor was still like in the game in voting intention looking down the track. So we had this interesting world where anything could have happened. Anything could have happened. Yeah. And remember that 70 percent number because without foreshadowing too much. Let's just say the story changed. Anyway. Should we also say early on that if listeners want to play at home. We've got a new website called essential report dot com dot au. And you can actually go in and watch these charts while you're listening. What a great way to spend. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I reinforce that actually. If you've got a minute and you can just hit pause pause. You know take out your earbuds for a minute fire up your computer or your laptop or your tablet or whatever you've got. Have a look at the Web site because Pete's looking at some of the graphs as we go basically to inform our conversation. So yes you can definitely do that. OK. So that was February. And as you say back then we spent a lot of time talking about that that decoupling between high support for the government's approach to the pandemic. But yet Labor was still in the contest which was unusual because most other opposition's around the country had tapped the mat by then. You know the premiers were so dominant that that's a that's a cul-de-sac we won't get into. But anyway so we roll from February to March and the big thing that happens in March of course is Australia is introduced to Britney Higgins the former liberal staffer who made an allegation of sexual assault in a ministerial office in Canberra. And that was a huge news event. And if we look at the data almost immediately afterwards we see a couple of things. We see that there was a seven point drop in voter approval of Scott Morrison's pandemic response. Seven points right on the pandemic response. He also took a hit on attributes as well. Over three polls he went from 65 percent approval in February 21 to 54 percent in April. But the interesting so it was a 10 point drop but he remained stable amongst blokes and it was the women vote. One in five women changed their view of the job the prime minister was doing. And look if we remember back he was clearly floundering out of his head not quite sure whether he should lead or just talk to Jen and the kids or where it should go. Manage it away. But it was interesting also the stability of the men's and even within the men's it was even scarier in that there was a cohort where the approval went up. Which was younger rural men. Yes. Remember when we saw that it was just kind of like oh oh my God. Like you know just I'm having I'm having this reaction outside the realm of partisan politics is just I'm just saying as a person it's kind of like oh my God. But yeah anyway yes as Pete says he took a hit but women were the principal actors in taking the hit and men more or less stayed. Although there was sort of a wobble at one point along there with men as well. Nothing precipitous nothing like the women but there was a wobble. But then we had this rebound in approval among certain cohorts of blokes. But it's interesting isn't it that he took the hit sort of not only just sort of in the more amorphous territory of do you think he's OK or not. But also on the pandemic response. Indeed. So there was almost a sense that at least with cohorts he'd lost that authority that had been remarkably resilient through 2020. What was also interesting at that time was the drop in support particularly amongst women weren't tied to particular voting intention. Like a large proportion obviously of progressive voters don't approve of conservative politicians as our principal. Of course. So that 20 percent drop amongst women voters was also concentrated on those that would normally vote on that side of politics. So there were flashing lights. Yes well and that brings me so beautifully. It's almost like we semi-planned this to the phenomenon of liberal women which if you sort of want to look back for Pete's greatest hits over the year in terms of the columns. I do think that was your best column of the year where if you don't remember it you can track it down on the Web site very easily. But basically Pete mused about this idea that we've sort of had in Australian politics for a long time really since the Howard era. It's sort of like of the liberal woman who might change her vote. The initial version of that had the image of the siren calling us to the shore and I cut that out on advice from some very shrewd readers at the time who said that's not the time or the place. But the idea that progressives have always thought there is this group of female voters who we can get and originally I think it was around refugees and humanitarian issues. Well these women used to be referred to as doctors wives. It was the sort of yes and then it went into climate change and there was a lot of effort in the last political cycle to bring these women who might vote progressive at some stage across. My argument in that that column was I think sometimes we make the mistake that we think of these voters as women first and liberal voters second whereas a liberal voter by definition sees a smaller role for government. We had to actually probably go a bit closer into thinking about the world from their perspective. Although I think what's been really interesting particularly with a particular group of those voters the doctors wives the advent of the community independence I think is going to be really interesting because I think there's always been a barrier of thinking that they'll go from blue to green whereas labor is tribally not where they're going to go. And I think there's almost this safe harbor being created by the movement of community independence that could well play into this next political side. No exactly. And that's why it was that's why it was an important piece because it's sort of surfaced a whole debate a sort of a debate that goes on amongst back rooms and strategists because women with children are that sort of holy grail of of all political parties. They're the hardest voters to communicate with because they're busy. They're not necessarily watching the news every night. Everyone wants those people right like swinging. I'm not talking about doctors wife's what it is a dreadful that is a dreadful label. But anyway I'm not talking about that because they are obviously engaged people who have picked a team. I'm just saying women generally political parties are very fixated on because women can decide the outcome of elections and they're not always listening closely and they're hard to communicate. But in terms of that particular cohort. Yes it's as Pete says like the sort of building story throughout the year was was there a prospect of a safe harbor for liberal women who had looked at the prime minister and and the government and thought really. I just don't think that this fellow and the sort of tone and temper of the party represents you know that represents us on a range of issues. So anyway that's going to be watch this space isn't it. I think I think you're pessimistic though aren't you about whether or not those whether or not they ever peel off. Look history says that ultimately they don't. That's where I think there may be this different dynamic this time obviously that's not. Well there are a large number of seats where these community independents are going to be active. So I think it is really interesting to look there. I wouldn't assume that if they do get into power that their votes would put a labor government in either. Like I think there is a real assumption as we watch all this of the intervention on climate by basically progressive philanthropists that the votes automatically see a progressive government. It may well be that they form a base that force the libs and the coalition to come up with something approaching a policy for the 21st century on climate. So I hate trying to predict the future but you look at what's happened in the past. I guess the other thing I'd say is if you look at what happened in the past Morrison almost ran a one man race last time. His approval at the end of the year is down under 50 percent for the first time since the bushfires. I think he's got his work cut out but he did it last time and I think there's still a sense of trauma in a lot of us that one person very good at the images and the messages could override an entire movement. I think that said a bit about us but I also think it does say that he's quite a formidable campaigner. Oh he's an absolutely formidable campaigner. And yeah so there are these factors it's sort of like you know we think about the age we live in as being an age where people's parties and loyalties have diminished because there's a rise of third party you know kind of micro parties independence all of that sort of stuff. So it is really interesting to think about you know how how rusted on you know any cohort of voters is with their particular tribe. And as you say then you've got to overlay the dynamic of a campaign with a formidable campaigner who understands how to market and message and you know his subspecialty is finding the goat track to victory. But anyway we're getting ahead of ourselves. Let's touch down in April now. Oh goodness we're still in April. I'm sorry. Yes. No no no we're in April. Because we we need to talk about the other major challenge that the government was facing at that point in time apart from the whole aftermath of Brittany Higgins and the cultural issues that surfaced during that time. The other major problem the government had was the vaccination rollout by April. If we look at our numbers voters were starting to twig that there was a problem that we were in fact not at the front of the queue. We were a considerable distance away from the front of the queue. So what what was going on around. You know this was the first time I think in the story of the pandemic where there was actually a political contest. So the prime minister over egged his triumphalism about a vaccine rollout which is obviously his path to the election that would have been held a couple of months ago. And we would have been getting ready for another term of coalition government. But they got behind then the health orders came through on AstraZeneca and they saw an opportunity to slow things down that created panic that slowed down vaccine rollout. Then we had the leakages from the quarantine and then all of a sudden we're back in lockdown. So we go from 70 percent approval of the federal government response to covid in March and by August we're down at 38. So it's effectively cut in half. And but also what happened was Labor early got a strong set of messages. Remember he only had two jobs vaccine rollout quarantine and it almost became a mantra. But it was also because the lived experience was there. It didn't seem to be you know gratuitous negative campaigning. It was actually what people were thinking. So it worked. And so you did see this massive drop in in confidence at the same time the states that were actually in lockdown and the states that were avoiding lockdown. The the regard for state governments to remain remarkably durable. So you had this whereas it was kind of being a team government in 2020. This gap started opening up. And then the other thing you started doing is flying at the states not realising that the gap was opening to 20 points in terms of approval between the two. Yeah. Yeah. It was quite it was it was sort of fascinating that phenomenon. If you did look at the data, there was like it's more than an air gap. It's like I don't know what I don't know what you describe that gap as because again one step back from the data and just talking to MPs and you know sort of hearing what people say was sort of you know what's happened during covid. Obviously it's reminded people about states. The states are well and truly back in people's minds. The premiers have been the ones with the power. And yes, the approval of the premiers will particularly in the West, Queensland, Tassie. You know, that's all that we don't do, Tassie, do we? But it's like everyone held up. But even in the two lockdown states, New South Wales and Victoria. About 50 percent. And I think the dynamic that shifted is traditionally there's a bit of a balancing out, particularly in Queensland and WA, where you see we'll have state labor governments. We want the opposite side in Canberra. Exactly. At this point, particularly in WA, the question that voters ask when we're doing our work with them is who's going to support Mark McGowan better? And like when you've been a guy that's been taken to him with a 4B2, it's not a great value proposition to be responding to. No, no, no, it was sort of amazing because you sort of, you know, they set up this whole I think, look, if we if we sort of unpick it, it's not like, you know, Scott Morrison, who is the most data driven prime minister we've ever seen. Suddenly just just lost his mind. I think what was starting to happen in the winter of discontent that we're describing was they started developing problems with their base. The base was annoyed by the long lockdowns, disconcerted by, you know, big government in people's faces with public health orders. I'm talking about their absolute rusted ons. Right. I mean, the bulk of Australia is totally on board. We love vaccines. No, no, no. We and we would we have been astonished through the pandemic about what people were up for. I remember when like 80 percent of people wanted ankle bracelets or something. I mean, it's like, oh, my God, you know, it's like you and I have had some moments, right. But I just mean they're they're absolute rusted on core base. I think the prime minister in the middle of the year started to detect problems. And that was when Palmer started getting busy as well. And we saw like it's small numbers, but we saw a doubling of UAP in that sort of third quarter. And anyone that's got access to an Instagram account or anything will know it's just all yellow at the moment. And while in 2019, the effect of Palmer was ultimately to run a negative campaign against Shorten. This time it was really a freedom campaign against all sides of the post. And I don't discount the amount that that was feeding into the fermenting of what we've seen now on the streets. Like this use of the technological political infrastructure by Palmer. He's just got you see the numbers coming in the reporting of the amount that the parties are putting into these social media spends. And like labor and even the coalition, they're putting like seven, eight thousand and there's six figures from. Yes, eleven two billion. Yeah. And so the big question for me is when push comes to shove last time, that independent campaign became an anti-labor campaign. Does that happen again this time or does it poison the water for the incumbent government? If they you know, the other big change last election, which I think a lot of us missed in the 2016 when labor did pretty well. One nation preference against sitting MPs. Yes. In 2019, they preference against labor. So where do these outliers go when they think both parties have let them down? Do they preference against the sitting MPs, which by logic would help the opposition? Yes. Or do they then always go back to type? It is a really significant question. Yeah. And one we don't have an answer to yet, because interestingly, the UAP in the last federal campaign, as Pete says, were basically like a super PAC for the reelection of a coalition government. But they did the messaging sharpened as we reached the decision point like that final two weeks or the part as was Bill Shorten. You know, negative messages about Bill Shorten. So far, we, as you say, we've been in the pox on all your houses territory by these some of these players. So it's going to be a pretty hard pivot to then go incumbent, isn't it? Like I wouldn't put it past him, but I wouldn't put it past them. But it's sort of. But anyway, it's an unknown. And what we can see by the government's behavior, because we've had this strange phenomenon on and off in periods since the winter of Morrison appearing to position himself against his own record. Right. We've had this strange like does not compute. Right. But in a broader sense as well, like the big question I had the start of the year was would the government learn from their success or would they revert to type? Right. And they the success last year was to put double the amount of support for people that were out of work. They got rid of that. Yeah. It was to work collaboratively with the states. They got rid of that. Yeah. Was to come up with unifying messages. They got rid of that. So they've kind of almost frittered away what seemed to have been a really successful politically model of government. Through almost willful design. And it just it blows my mind sometimes. I know. And it's it really is odd because it's sort of like what if we think about Morrison's transition from the disaster of the bushfires into Covid and what he learned, it was a period in his prime ministership where he, I think, genuinely did attempt what we would call big tent leadership. Right. Build a big coalition in the center. Share power, share responsibility. Exactly. All of that. Right. And it was the first time we'd seen him do it. And it was sort of and it was interesting because it's not his natural disposition in the sense this guy is always he's thinking like a campaign director. So it's kind of like I only need 50 plus one. Right. I don't need to do big tent. I just have to know I'll win. Right. But he did that. He sort of established a mojo around that. But then I honestly don't know whether the whether it was starting to panic about the base peeling off, where it was starting to worry whether or not Clive Palmer would show up for them or show up as a foe. Look, it's probably a combination of these things. But it has been a really fascinating dynamic in the back half of the year to watch Morrison, because if you look at the data, which is the point of this conversation, the period in which he was most approved of most, you know, the strategy was approved of was during his big tent phase. And anyway, as you say, he's kind of the way I observe it is that I think a lot of this second half of the year, he has been trying to build the hill to fight the election on. Definitely. One of the deft and I know it frustrates a lot of progressives, but a lot of the deft work that Labor has done in opposition has been what they haven't announced. And they haven't given him a climate hill to fight on and they haven't given him a tax hill to fight on. And that may have implications in the way Labor governs. But the bigger implication is if Labor doesn't govern, that's all hypothetical anyway. So I think at some point he was trying to make the future and opening up Australia his hill to die on. And so he kept trying to find a purchase point. But each time he did it, the fact was 90 percent of Australians had got vaccinated. So he was talking to such a small group that you don't actually have. You need to fight a fight when you've got a solid base. Yes, when you've got a battalion behind you. You've got to find a path to 50 percent plus one in the key seats you need to win on. And I think they're still looking for it. I'm sure they're trawling through every statement Albo's ever made since he was a student activist. And they're trying on the religious freedoms and they were having a I'm not quite sure the strategy on trolling, because I don't know how they they get a contest around that. So I still think a lot of what we're seeing now is is trying to find the issue that proves it's too big a risk to change horses, because I don't think where Morrison is with those numbers on approval now that he can just run. I've been a great leader. Just give me another term. Yeah, it's more fraud. And again, almost like we planned this, Pete, you've provided the perfect segue. You know, we'll just link you here for a bit. Anthony Albanese, as you mentioned, you have detailed the small target strategy and how Morrison has actually found that difficult. I think people in the back half of the year will have seen that, that the prime minister has found that difficult because he's a combatant that needs a counterpoint and he hasn't had one on on a few key issues. So what is the data just in very helicopter terms? We won't be so exhaustive with the opposition leader, given that we're very close to an election now. How's he traveling? So he's in net positives, which opposition leaders normally aren't. And I don't think there's been an election in the last decade where opposition leaders have been in net positives. Bill never was. Abbott wasn't even when he won in 2013. At this stage, he's at 40 approval, about 35 percent disapproval. Still 25 percent don't know. Those in the Beltway think Albanese is someone that's been in our life forever. There is a huge cohort that go who? So I think that by design and also by circumstance, he has not been a high profile leader, particularly during the first phase of the pandemic, where it was just get out of the way. Like that was the only job of an opposition leader. This year has been more effective in building the negative and removing the bad hills. And now the job is how do you put a proposition? If you say that incumbency is out, probably character for Morrison's out. So it becomes what's the future look like for Australia? And normally that is running on the economy. Right. Yes. So Labor's opportunity is to come up with an economic plan that means something to people. I've given you my theory many times. Liberals win when who's better at managing the economy? Is the question in a theoretical sense. When you put people in the equation, you can come up with an economic narrative that means something. Labor's got a shot. Last time they won 2007, the economy became about workers rights. I think the opportunity for Labor is to come up with an economic story that's about people. They've got the building blocks there. They've got early learning and TAFE in terms of building people into the labor market. They've got job security in terms of what are jobs like. And I think they're building a proposition on more Australian industry, which is really popular. So you end up with this kind of a better economy for working people. The coalition's just got their natural brand advantage, except this time around. Yes. Interestingly. They're line ball. I've never seen this on the question, who's better at managing the economy? I think it's 36, 36. It's normally a 15 percent lead for the coalition. That signals that that natural advantage isn't there. Again, doesn't mean what's going to happen next, but it means that that normal sense that as you come around the home turn, that the coalition's three or four lengths ahead because of economic management, they're neck and neck. Yeah. Yeah. Do we believe those numbers? Which ones? The economic. I asked Jim Chalmers last week, I had him in the studio. I said, do you believe that? Because it's sort of it's so counterintuitive. It's so against the well, see, we've got two questions in our poll. We've got the who do you trust on on the economy and we've got who do you trust to manage the interests of ordinary working Australians? Yes, exactly. Yes. And Labor's ahead about always ahead on the second. Yes. But it's the first where Labor hasn't made a saying. Do I believe my poll? Like we've just done a whole half hour talking about my polling and now you're saying, do I believe it? Polls are an abstraction. They they give you a sample and your job is to make sense out of it. I've never seen a number like that. Maybe it's a rogue, except that every other answer was totally predictable in the polls. So it says to me that something's going on in response. So if they're just going out saying economy, economy, economy, which is kind of like one of his things, he's been iterating. Absolutely. It's not it's not a given. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, anyway, I was being cheeky. Let's because, you know, it's you and me. And of course, we we we are chatting away amiably and could go for several hours. But anyway, let's just before we get into possible scenarios next year, let's just for our regular readers of the poll. Let's just do a quick refresher on to pay plus because, guys, it's an election year next year. Pete and I have been very keen to dial down the horse race and we will continue to do that. And if you've listened to us in the past, we've done a whole podcast on why we why we are doing that. And so we're not proposing to radically change course. But obviously, there will be more interest next year in the voting intention figures. So we need to explain to PPE plus again, because if you read polls regularly, you'll be used to looking for the primary votes and then you'll be looking for the two party preferred vote. You know, that's common polling practice, but we are doing it slightly differently. So traditionally, they all add up to 100. But there's a trick in there that isn't really made clear, which is people that are undecided are taken out. Yes, I think one of our insights after the last election was being so clear that Labor was ahead for so long that we'd actually disenfranchised the disengaged who when they did engage turned heavily to that top line SCOMO messaging of the bill you can't afford. I think that's actually a reasonably defendable thesis. So how do we ensure that we don't repeat those mistakes? We keep the disengaged in. And we say even a week out, there'll be between 12 and 7 percent that say I don't know. They their vote is just as important, if not more important than the people that are locked in to the Greens or Labor or wherever they are. So by keeping them in, it keeps the sense that the contest is live. But it's interesting, I was watching the way that they reported the US presidential last year and they've started doing the same thing over there. I'm not saying we're the market leader, but I think there's a great way to lead it. What do you mean? But there is a growing sense that polls were being misused to almost predict what the future is going to hold. All you can do is say at this moment in time. And what that does is as we get close to the election, if there is that sort of seven percent in the middle, they become a focus of curiosity rather than pulled out of the equation and probably a bit of greater scrutiny about the way we're trying the various parties try to pitch at those disengages. And hopefully a bit more accountability as well, particularly in the context of spreads of disinformation and misinformation. So I think it actually sets out a really neat challenge as well as probably a bit of a fail safe for us falling into the the trap of saying they're ahead or they're behind. Because it's just not a good way of looking. No, no, no. Yeah, it's not right. And and it's not much noise. This is as much my issue and people who report polls issue as the data itself. And this is a discipline on me rather than saying that polls point to Scott Morrison winning or Anthony Albanese winning. The discipline is by by disaggregating those numbers and making them clear to you. What we're saying is, look, at the moment, labors are ahead or Morrison's ahead. But they're not even ahead, but have more support than the other side. Yes. And then. But there's, you know, eight percent, 15 percent. How many it ends up being who are undecided. And the point of putting them in there, I mean, Pete's explained it beautifully, but is that, you know, the people who are undecided actually determine election outcomes in this country. They are the people who determine the outcome. We got nothing to do with it. Listeners, we're irrelevant. We just watch from the cheat sets. Exactly. We could not be more irrelevant. Right. It's that group who are undecided and often undecided right up until the minute they walk into the polling booth. They are the people who determine election outcomes. So that's why we are reporting it in this way. So I'm just reminding you about this so that when we go into the new year, you don't have to clutch your head in horror and think, oh, my God, what is this thing again? The one thing we might ease off, we've also only been putting them out every three months in the rearview mirror. I think once the election starts, we might go back to the bad behavior. But just because it's an election. I know. And, you know, and much in all, as we have worked really hard, you and I to dial down the horse race genuinely. Next year, there's a horse race. Giddy up, listeners. Anyway, again, God, it's like you're a segue machine today. Right. OK, so now we're at next year. And without predictions are stupid and we're not in that business. But what are your potential scenarios, do you think, for next year in terms of obviously there's a coalition one and there's a labor one? Yeah, I think labor comes up with a proposition that does not give too much ammunition to create a sense of risk, but also builds a sense of hope that we can build back a better, stronger economy. And they really own that and critically that the noise around progressive politics recognizes that the main game is changing government rather than campaigning at labor and opposition, which I think we really did last time around until it got so much noise that it reinforced the higher tax narrative because everyone was a winner for the coalition. I still think that there's a sense that this guy is a one man campaigning machine. If he can harness the infrastructure of conservative stability, which is lots of donors bringing Clive back into the tent, keeping our friends at News Limited, living the dream, using the power of incumbency, filling the field with muck so that the real stories don't get through. We can't take anything for granted. And ultimately, it becomes a seat by seat contest. There's probably three seats in WA that Labor's looking at. There's three seats in Tassie. They thought they would have won last time that they lost. There's a bunch of noise in Queensland, although the margins are a lot larger now after the bad time. New South Wales is weird. I'm still getting a handle on it. So there's going to be this big national conversation. There'll be a wave of counter narratives and then there'll be seat by seat. If people want to change government, the one thing they do is get active in their local area. And I guess the other wildcard are these community independents that could be all over the place and forcing the libs to fight both the right flank and the left flank. So imagine being up against Clive Palmer and Zoey Daniel and trying to sort of set a fire. But it's really interesting. Yeah, yeah, it's interesting. My only my only prediction is that something will happen that blows our mind and then all seem totally understandable in the rear view mirror. The rear view mirror is so clear. The problem is the windscreen. It is always we stare at that windscreen. Just not real sure. All those squashed insects and smears and a couple of chips. Anyway, look, thank you, Pete. That was that was exactly what we needed really to round out this week. Thank you to you guys for listening. We really do appreciate it. Thank you all for keeping me company throughout the parliamentary year. The pot isn't finishing. I reckon I've got a few episodes left in me, but the parliamentary year is finishing. So as always, we're grateful when you listen and you engage and all of that sort of stuff. Thank you to Melanie Tate, who's executive producer of this show, while Miles Martinone is taking a short break. And thank you to Karishma Luthriya, who cuts it for us. We will be back next week.