 So I think we made some mistakes in the lead up to this. The United States was annoyed, that's to put it mildly, that Australia unilaterally decided to pull its embassy out when it did earlier in the year. There's concern about the fact that that then left no diplomatic presence so the people to whom we did have an obligation had nowhere to physically go with their applications for asylum. It just further complicated what then became this almost impossible task of getting the right people out in a timely way. Hello lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You are with Catherine Moophy, the host and political editor of Guardian Australia. And with me this week is one of my favourite people in the whole world. That's lovely. She was momentarily speechless. I was. Yes, it's Karen Middleton who is the chief political correspondent with the Sandate Paper. Now the reason we're having this yak is because I have been massively COVID focused but some seismic things in geopolitical terms have been playing out over the last couple of weeks. That is what's going on in Afghanistan and there is no journalist in the country who is more authoritative on Afghanistan than Karen. Well that's a big call. No. I can live up to that. No, it's absolutely true and you know even though you're a girl Karen. A girl. I know. Who knows about the war. Sweet. A girl who knows about the war. It still surprises people. Oh God, I'm wanting so bad. Anyway, a couple of years, well God how long ago? No it's like more than a couple of years ago, the book. It's ten years ago, this week I think. I wrote a book on the sort of political back story to the Afghanistan conflict called An Unwinnable War. Which yes, this is what I was getting to, the title right? So the clue was in the title. But anyway, I just want to start at the beginning right because my working assumption is most of us have been completely in the COVID cave. Our Guardian Essential Polling this week had a couple of questions about Afghanistan which the results of which suggested to me very strongly that people, it's just people haven't got the bandwidth really to absorb what's going on. So let's just start at the beginning with the Unwinnable War. Just remind people, how did this happen? How did we get there? So it started with September 11 really, 2001, 20 years ago coming up. I was in Washington DC actually with the then Prime Minister John Howard. There were a bunch of us journos who were there for his official visit and that was when those terrorist attacks occurred. Now the United States understandably wanted to avenge those attacks, felt that they needed to respond and they went to Afghanistan in that vein because Afghanistan had been the training ground for a lot of the people that ended up launching the attacks on the World Trade Centre and other sites around the United States. So that was the reason the US went in. Initially actually they were a bit reluctant to gather allies around them. Sometimes allies can be a bit more trouble than they were. So actually Australia forced its way in. John Howard having been in Washington was deeply affected by what happened. Desperately wanted Australia to support the United States as an ally and a friend and effectively on the spot committed Australia to whatever the US decided to do. That was a war in Afghanistan and by December of that year forces were going into Afghanistan. They were there for a year or so and then the tempo of things eased back. They managed to overthrow the Taliban regime very quickly but the other reason they were there was to try and get Osama bin Laden, the mastermind behind the attack. They didn't actually achieve that for a decade but they eased back, took their eye off Afghanistan because things were going on in Iraq and in fact started the war in Iraq based as we now know on false intelligence about weapons of mass destruction. There are a lot of complicated views on why that occurred but one of them is that after the September 11 attacks there was so much paranoia about missing something again that there had been an intelligence failure there that people were overly jumpy about intelligence. Now there are other factors at play as well but that was I think one of them and Australia as well as the US went to Iraq, took their eye off Afghanistan and then in 2005 things got bad in Afghanistan again and we had to go back and that's when the mission really shifted and started to become about nation building. The sort of thing that John Howard and other leaders have always said we shouldn't get involved in because it's sort of never ending and I think we've seen the mission there shift and change over the years, Prime Minister in, Prime Minister out, they stayed there but they lost a bit of focus on what they were doing and it dragged on as we now know for two decades. And so that's how we got in and how we got in sort of suggests the reasons why we got out but let's do that next. So it's not just us obviously, the primary actors here are the Americans. So why did we get out? Why did we end? I think the Americans could see that they couldn't achieve whatever it was they were trying to achieve at that point. I've always taken the view that nobody in the White House or the Pentagon had ever read a history book or the State Department when they went into Afghanistan in the first place. They didn't seem to understand the country they were going into with its feudal history and its generations of seeing off invaders and the absence of that understanding along with assumptions about imposing democratic systems on a country full of fiefdoms with warlords and tribal allegiances and this tenacity and determination to see off the infidels meant that they just never succeeded in creating the kind of nation they wanted to create. They also installed leaders that I think worked well for the United States but didn't necessarily bring the country together in a way they wanted to and it became very clear that they needed to get out and that process started really right back in about 2012. Julia Gillard was Prime Minister here and they started talking about winding down and moving out and I went to, I did three trips to Afghanistan as a correspondent and my third one was in 2012 and it was just a couple of weeks before those forward operating bases in rural Aruzgan province that Australia was on, was at, were pulled apart and they moved back so they really did withdrawals beginning right back then. Ultimately we moved all of those people out around 2014 and there was just a small group based in Kabul doing training and the like but far far smaller than had been the case in the years prior to that. Yeah because I myself only went once and on a Prime Ministerial trip but I visited the base at Tarrant Counton and it was a pretty big operation at that point. We were very much embedded there so the dismantling sort of came in stages is what you're saying really. That's right. Yeah okay and also I think in terms of Joe Biden's position, my recollection because I read the Obama memoir a couple of months ago and my recollection from that is that when Obama was deciding what to do in Afghanistan, Biden was the most strident voice for get the hell out right. That has been a long standing position of his. That has been a long standing position of his. Getting to where we are right now all these past couple of weeks has been via Donald Trump as well. Now when Donald Trump was President the US took more concrete steps to start winding back and if you talk to a number of analysts who know a lot more about Afghanistan than me they will tell you that that's where the really big mistakes were made in terms of this stage of the process. Because he wanted to negotiate with the Taliban right? Yeah I mean there are a number of people even in this country who say they were always going to have to do that given that the military solution hadn't worked. I remember the Chief of the Defence Force Angus Campbell for example addressing committee hearing here in Parliament House not long ago talking about the fact that they always needed a political solution. So back to 2020, February of 2020 the United States authorised talks with the Taliban involved US negotiators in the Taliban. It really froze the Afghan government out of the picture and the argument goes that the US gave away far too much in those talks. Legitimised the Taliban for a start in those discussions, elevated them to the equivalent of a government which was part of the challenge for the Taliban in regaining power. Negotiated or agreed to allow the release of up to 5,000 Taliban prisoners some of whom had been responsible for murdering coalition soldiers including Australians and did that effectively unilaterally against the wishes of a number of other countries including ours. And also set a withdrawal date, a firm date initially it was in May of this year that was to be the date. The only thing that really changed when Joe Biden took over was that the date shifted. It shifted back to September but also inexplicably he picked a symbolic date that was going to be symbolic for the Taliban September 11th the 20th anniversary. I mean nobody I've spoken to can understand why that occurred. You know it was going to motivate the Taliban you think to get back in to power by that time if not on that day. So how they can say they were surprised by the speed. I'm a bit puzzled I don't know there was intelligence around that said it was possible that Kabul would fall and in fact I did a story a week or so ago based on some intelligence that was within days of Kabul falling saying it was likely that Kabul would fall but not but between now and the end of the year so they weren't forecasting the timeline and they've clearly been somehow caught short by the march on Kabul which happened very rapidly on that Sunday the 15th of August. Yeah and we'll get to Kabul and what went down there and I know from our conversations over the last week or so you've had some very stressful conversations with people and we'll get to that. But first of all in terms of okay so America we've sort of mapped out the reasons why we went in and why the Americans came out. What's your own view as to the merits of it right? You've referenced that obviously well God knows why they picked September 11 you know like the obvious kind of screw-ups right? But are we right to withdraw or not? Well look it's kind of almost an impossible question to answer because on the one hand we can't stay there forever and it was quite clear that the attempts to impose the kind of government on Afghanistan that the United States and its allies wanted to impose just wasn't working. So it was more the question of how we got out I think. I think that is really the thing you have to debate because you know you can't stay in another country forever and there's an argument that we shouldn't have stayed as long as we have and where on that timeline we should have pulled out is going to be the subject of endless debate. But the way we've done it I think is not been good. I know the US president says it couldn't have happened any other way. Well there are other people who have a different view and the chaos and you know the terrible situation we saw in Kabul over recent times and the fact that we have left behind some people to whom the allied forces owe an obligation and I think a moral obligation will tell you that it did not go as well as it could have and should have. I accept that there's never going to be an easy way to evacuate people little bit by little bit but you know surely we could have done it in a more orderly manner than was what happened. It's sort of like I guess you know the sort of brutally realist view is that if you lose the war you don't get to determine the you know a graceful exit for yourself. I mean that's the real politic of it. We've talked quite a bit about America and obviously recollections from the Howard period just specifically on the withdrawal before we get to scenes from Kabul. Let's just think about the Australian government's role because there's been debate here obviously about whether or not you know we evacuated people too soon, not soon enough, which people we evacuated, which people we left behind. What's the cut through on that in terms of the Australian government's culpability in all of this? Well I think there is some culpability in terms of pulling the embassy out when they did. There is some tension between the Australian government and the US government in both directions. I think the Australian government has been very frustrated that the US has made some unilateral decisions and announcements without consulting Australia, including Joe Biden's announcement of the new withdrawal date, which was made on behalf of all the allies before Australia had got a chance to speak. So there have been some tensions like that and the United States was annoyed, that's to put it mildly, that Australia unilaterally decided to pull its embassy out when it did earlier in the year because you know these things have potentially momentum of their own, they can have consequences of their own, they can create their own dynamic. So if you are suddenly the first country to pull your embassy out, you're saying to the population we don't think it's safe here, we think things are going to seed and we're getting out and that can then create that atmosphere, make other countries panic and precipitate a sort of domino effect and I think that to a degree it did do that and so there was concern about that. There's concern about the fact that that then left no diplomatic presence so the people to whom we did have an obligation, the people who had worked for Australia either as security guards or translators at the embassy in Kabul or with the Australian forces in Uruzgan had nowhere to physically go with their applications for asylum. Some of those were sort of in the ether, the process was long and drawn out and they were now having to send those overseas, they were being handled from Amman in Jordan. So again, it just further complicated what then became this almost impossible task of getting the right people out in a timely way. So I think we made some mistakes in the lead up to this. Our government has taken a very low risk self-interested view and I can understand governments doing that, they will put their own people's fate first and they were concerned for the security of Australian diplomats but the United States had offered to co-locate our embassy in the US compound and our government didn't do that. Now it's my view that Maurice Payne was the foreign minister, was inclined to that but I think the decisions were made elsewhere by others. Well certainly the cabinet decision that was taken to finally close the embassy was taken when she was in Washington. She'd just been to Kabul, she'd met with President Garni and others. When she landed in Washington she dialed into a cabinet meeting and that decision was taken. So it's been a little unclear exactly what the dynamics of that were but it seems to me from the outside there were some tensions around those processes and that decision but the decision was taken, it wasn't reversed and then we've seen everything that's flowed in the months between May and August. That is really fascinating. Now that brings us to what's flowed which is the scenes in Kabul now even people with very limited bandwidth I think will have observed some of those scenes from an evacuation. Just share with people some of the conversations you've been having with people on the ground there as this has played out. Yeah so I've had conversations with people here in Australia, in the form of veterans, with the deep engagement with Afghanistan, with Afghans and Australians and also with people in Afghanistan, some of whom were lined up for me by those people I've talked about. A whole range of people from Australian citizens trying to get home but with Afghan family they were also concerned about and worried about their own safety because of their associations to people who already have visas, to people who had applied for visas, to people who wanted to apply. So I had journalistic contact with a number of people and the conversations are quite harrowing, their own safety was at risk, some of them didn't want to use their real names, one of them quite bravely did but all of them were keeping their locations secret. All of them were worrying about how they were going to get to the airport if and when our evacuation actually began and those conversations were initially anyway in the lead up to that what was going to happen there and whether in fact they'd get out and you know they were well founded those concerns because even Australian citizens ended up being stuck outside that airport for days, some of them. I was also contacted by a number of strangers, I think anyone who had any kind of public visibility on Afghanistan was getting contacted on social media or via email or people get your phone number and they were begging for help. So I think in an emergency situation you make the decision that you'll just pass the details to the government, you will pass the details on, that's as much of a commitment as you can give. Where there were Australian citizens I was a little bit more engaged because it was very clear that the government had an obligation, a consular responsibility for those people and so I was trying to help those people a bit more directly and I ended up at some points sort of connecting them up with DFAT passing on messages. You got to the point where there were people standing outside the airport having guns pointed at them, guns fired over their heads, crying on the phone to their relatives who would ring me, I would ring DFAT, a number of us were doing this, all kinds of people and it is a bit of a challenge to you as a journalist thinking where am I in all this, where is my own moral responsibility, ethical, journalistic, whatever, people were in crisis so you did your best to help them. And you know we would get, I would suggest to them take a photo of yourself so we can see what you're wearing, you know we could see the colour of a woman's hijab and we could pass that to the government so they could look out for that person from the other side of the fence because most of the Australian forces were inside the airport and the perimeter was really Americans and other countries. And there was a lot of confusion, reasons that weren't being recognised, people just not being able to push their way to the front. And so it was a pretty frantic situation I think and a lot of officials and soldiers and others from Australia did pretty incredible work. There are criticisms that can be made about how the whole thing was set up and maybe some confused communications between different agencies. DFAT took the lead but there was clearly some confusion going on but there were a lot of people who worked their guts out really on it and it's a great thing that they got out, the people that they did and we can argue about whether it was too slow and too late and all of that but they did get people out and they did well to do that. And did we get, I mean this is sort of a ridiculous question because the answer obviously did we get every single person out will have to be no given those conditions. But I mean how many people did we get out? I don't mean a number, I just mean like how many people now are left there basically, well in circumstances that I have no words for? Well some hundreds I think. I mean if you talk to the people who've been advocating for the interpreters for example, some of them got out, some of their people got out, some of them didn't. I know of a family that a migration agent was trying to assist, she got some of the people out, that family she didn't get out, she had rung me begging for help. I could offer a lot less assistance to people in that situation but what I know did occur with that family is they had been at the airport for days and they had been standing right near that trench and the government did put out its message on the Thursday warning and quite directly and openly warning of the risk of a terrorist attack. Now some people were wondering if that warning was just because they wanted people to leave the airport because they didn't have enough room to take them and maybe there was a bit of that but I do think they were genuinely worried and it's a good thing that people like this family heeded that warning, they got sent a direct message via their migration agent from the government that they should leave the airport grounds if they couldn't get through. They did about an hour or two before the bomb went off. So they're still there, that's not a win but they're not dead and that is. No, exactly. That's the world of an evacuation when you lose. Peter Dutton at one point made a bit of a performance of when the government's role was criticised in saying well, you know, we could, I mean he didn't say we could, you know, terrorists could come back. It wasn't that blunt. Well he did say that a number of the interpreters have now joined the Taliban. It was pretty blunt. I'm sort of working out like what the fair construction of his remarks were. Anyway and it was sort of at the time it was very jarring because the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister were sort of, you know, much, much more softly, softly ways sort of sending the message to people smugglers that the collapse of a country doesn't mean you're back in business, all that sort of stuff. But then in what Peter Dutton, the Feds Minister, all guns blazing. What do you make of this sort of, you know, double sides and you know, yes they work for us but then they work for the other guy. Good cop, bad cop. Exactly. Like what do you make of all that? I think they were messaging to a couple of different constituencies. I think they were messaging to the people smugglers. I think they were very conscious, particularly the Prime Minister, of not wanting to restart the moats. Indeed that was a risk. So I think you will find there's probably a video of his little address about that. Doing the rounds online as a deliberate attempt to put that in front of anyone who had ideas of bringing people here. But I think they were also talking to a domestic constituency. I think their view, certainly now and you've touched on it, we talked about people not having bandwidth to grasp this. The government takes the view and I think others agree whether they think it's a good thing or not that people don't really care about this. They made the judgement based on the fact that it wasn't leading the TV news bulletins. It was all still COVID. Now whether people would care more about this in a humanitarian way in the absence of COVID is impossible to know. So I think there's a constituency that has a humanitarian view but there's definitely a constituency that if anyone was going to pay attention they would, that were worried that bringing in people from Afghanistan was going to be importing terrorists. And I think there was some messaging to some of those people in perhaps conservative electorates about that. The government does have to be careful about who it brings in and in a crisis like this, sure there might well be people who seek to come when the checking isn't being done as thoroughly and you do have to be careful, you absolutely do. But you've also got to find somewhere the balance between the humanitarian and the moral obligation and that care and concern. And there'll be questions asked about whether that right balance was found and certainly people in the Afghan community here were very offended and upset at the suggestion that all the people who worked for Australia were somehow now joining the Taliban. Suspect. It's true that in Afghanistan there are very ruthless and hard-headed people, very pragmatic. They have had invasions over the centuries and they have seen them off. They take a very hard practical view of where their interests lie. And so I think going back to what the US has said and the President and US about how he was astonished that the soldiers all laid down their arms, well I think there was a very clever strategy employed by the Taliban to pick off provincial capitals, soft targets, overrun the soldiers and then create this domino effect where word gets around and once there's momentum they see that their interests do not lie in resisting. They give up and that's what they have done. And I think so in that respect sure there might have been people who gave in and put their arms down and said okay. But to suggest that everyone who worked for us, which was the implication, has somehow got evil intent towards this country I think is probably over, significant overreach and it did upset a lot of people. Yeah. Let's just end on what next and I mean that sort of both in Afghanistan and sort of geopolitically I know both of us would love a crystal ball but you know within the bounds. I read a piece in the Washington Post this week for example that posited that Biden had done the right thing and in fact withdrawing the sort of resources from the Afghanistan conflict both psychic and physical and financial and then having that you've got then some surplus that you can devote to the sort of well I guess the sort of the rising power problem. China, Russia. Yeah. That is sort of once America has extricated itself from this conflict you know look out the rest of the world was basically I mean it was more nuanced than that but sort of right. What do you reckon about all that? I'm sure there's truth in that that the United States you know has to be very glib about it bigger fish to fry and needs to look further afield on the world stage in terms of its big challenges now and I'm sure Australia wouldn't quibble with the need to keep an eye on China in particular and be engaged in this region but I suppose that there is the question with no answer at this point about what we've left behind and what it becomes you know we do have to remember that the reason that we went in in the first place aside from getting a summer bin light and was to stop that country being a haven for terrorists in the future. What has occurred with the departure in the way that it occurred is that all the hardware the military hardware that the United States had is now in the hands of the Taliban. Now the big stuff the helicopters and the tanks and the other vehicles and the like have been dismantled or destroyed but there's a whole lot of small arms and other machinery that they will have access to now so they're well armed and they're reasonably well organised they've obviously had help in getting organised there's plenty of people who think they got help from Pakistan. So what kind of a force are they going to be and what kind of friends are they going to have? We've seen that terrible bombing at the airport attributed to ISIS-K who are not close friends to the Taliban but both have employed the same methods and do work to the same ends sometimes when it suits them. So we saw the Taliban accommodate organisations like Al Qaeda in the past we don't know what kinds of accommodations will be made we don't know what kind of country that will be or which other global powers will see it as in their interests to engage there and certainly there's talk about not only Pakistan but Russia and China and Iran and yet again Afghanistan becomes the pawn in the global games of other nations and so the two are not entirely disconnected when we look at the rise of China or Russia they will be watching what goes on there and whether there's an advantage they can gain from engaging with Afghanistan and Australia has a big challenge ahead of it too are we going to recognise a Taliban government? Do we proceed to recognise the Taliban government or are we going to hold out and not do that? It will be an interesting process leading up to that decision I think. And just last one which sort of flows from the general geopolitical imponderable. What do you reckon this says about Biden? Because obviously we've had a period of Trump who was an isolationist really by instinct obviously there was the trade battle with China etc was very much sort of preoccupied with the domestic theatre rather than sort of shaping American power in the world. Biden is said to be a guy of alliances and a sort of you know like a kind of Cold War you know sort of Atlantic kind of you know like NATO and NATO. A multilateralist than Trump was. Exactly right like what do you reckon what do you again I mean crystal ball I won't hold you I won't hold you to these predictions but what do you make of him and President Biden as a shaper of the world order? I think he's a more much more of an internationalist than Trump was. If you recall you know when he became the running mate for Obama one of the things that was said about him was that he had foreign policy credentials he had runs on the board not only from being in elected positions in the United States but that he also had those kinds of credentials so he's been engaged in these issues for a long time. He's conscious of the United States' interest on a global scale as well as domestically so I do think he will be engaged in the world in a much greater way than Trump was and you know history may change the glasses through which we view what's just gone on in Afghanistan right now it looks like a catastrophic failure but he will certainly get credit I think ultimately from the American people for getting out of Afghanistan because they have lost some thousands of people there and they certainly would be wanting that over. It's hard to know exactly what his legacy will be but I think you know a lot of people expect that he may only be a one-term president so he'll if he wants to achieve things on the world stage he will be in a hurry and that will be part of you know what has motivated the timeline I think here that this is not a president who can look probably look forward to two terms because of his age if nothing else you know we might be wrong about that but more so than recent presidents you will assume that Joe Biden is a person in a hurry who wants to get things done and he's obviously mindful of the domestic constituency if he wants to hand on to another Democrat if he doesn't want to run again but he's also going to be mindful of his legacy on the world stage given that that's an area of his interest so I think there will be a more of a global focus sure. There you go so you're all caught up on Afghanistan guys I promised you that you would be all caught up by the end of this conversation. Are they still awake? That's the question. No we're all better informed by that thank you and thanks for taking time out to come into the podcast and talk to me thank you to Miles Martagnone who's the EP of this show thank you to you guys for listening and sharing and all the usual rural parliament I think will rise by the end of today we're recording on Thursday I think they'll be gone for six weeks yep but we'll be back next week thanks again thanks.