 This is The Guardian. What drives gendered based violence is gender inequality. So in the prevention space, it very much is working to put forward positive role models for children about men and women and positive relationships. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You are on Australian Politics and you are with Catherine Murphy. And with me in the podcast this week is Amanda Rishworth, who is the Social Services Minister. I wanted to get Amanda onto the program this week because I wanted to have a reasonably in-depth conversation about the national plan to end violence against women and children, which she's been working up in concert with her state counterparts. So we're going to go there substantially. But I just want to start with a couple of opening general questions, Amanda, because you've been on the broadcast, I think, since you won the election. No, no, before the election. Before the election. Yeah, I know. It's kind of extraordinary. So obviously, social services, it's an enormous portfolio. It's enormously complicated. How are you finding it? Look, it has been a real estate learning curve, but an excellent journey to learn all the elements of the portfolio. So in the portfolio, we deal with obviously social security payments and all the elements around that. But I also get to do women's safety, which is a really important area and one we need to make some strides on. I also get to do with disability that is not part of the NDIS. So how do we make our community more accessible to people with disability, more inclusive, actually? And then I've also got families and communities. And so how do we build communities that support families, that have interventions that can lift people up? So it is a huge array of different programs and schemes, but they all have one thing in common, and that is to support people sometimes in their most difficult times. And for me, that presents so much opportunity to make a difference. And since you've taken on the portfolio in government, since you've been briefed and you're rolling out all the sort of first stage of your policy responses, what's been the most surprising thing? That's a good question. So probably the most surprising thing was that I... Just how many people's lives it touches. When I think about programs, it isn't just disadvantaged communities that this portfolio touches. It touches almost every single person's life around Australia. And so one of the surprising things that happened to me is that I was familiar with all the programs and a lot of the rules and the schemes just because of my work in my own electorate. I was going to say, constituent issues. Constituent issues, questions. I mean, there was one issue about that we're dealing with about volunteering. And I was aware of that because I'd had a connection with my local volunteering organisation. So for me, probably the surprising thing is social services. A lot of people might think it doesn't touch their lives when actually it has... I mean, I've described it as tentacles. I don't know if that's the right word, but it has tentacles right across Australia. It is a right word. And even things like a number of families get family tax benefit. That is something that the Commonwealth provides and that is part of the portfolio. So it really does touch the lives, I think, of every corner of the country and is relevant to every Australian. So that's particularly... I hadn't really thought that through before I got the portfolio. I hadn't thought how terrifying that would be. How much influence I have and how much impact... But importantly, how much impact I can have. Yes, well, probably a more positive way to look at it. Absolutely. OK, all right. So let's get into the national plan now. And I appreciate you spelling out the mechanics of your portfolio, because obviously not everybody listening to the show is completely au fait with how government works or what various things happen in various portfolios. So let's bring at least in the opening the same spirit to explaining the national plan, because there'll be people listening to the show who've never heard of it, have no idea what it is. Why don't you tell people what it is? Look, the national plan is a document that is meant to outline, and it does outline, a strategy to address gendered based violence in this country and violence against women and children for the next 10 years. It's a document that both the Commonwealth Government and states and territories have all signed up to. And so it gives us a pathway that drives investment, a clear shared understanding of some of the drivers of gendered based violence and what some of the solutions are going forward. So it really is a strategic document that calls out, defines what we're talking about, and then has a pathway to actually ending violence against women and children. And in that, OK, so it's sort of, it's like it's a sort of helicopter plan that sort of sets out those national objectives. You know, how does it actually translate to individual incidences where someone is fleeing a situation of family violence? Right, by that I mean, explain the mechanics, right? The Commonwealth expends the funds, it trickles down through the states to frontline services in essence. But you can do this far better than me, given that you're the one actually doing it. Yeah, so the plan, what it drives is where the investment should go. And some of that money is Commonwealth money that is being spent, sometimes through the states and territories, sometimes directly to organisations. And it also directs where state and territories put their money. One of the things I would say is that there are four domains in this national plan. So often when we think about responding to domestic and family violence, it is about the response piece. What happens to women and children as they are fleeing domestic violence? And a significant part of the plan is dedicated to that, which drives resources to frontline services, to payments that can be made available to women and children fleeing domestic violence. But this plan is more than that, because if we're constantly responding, and you would hear this in a number of social policy areas, if we're just responding to the crisis constantly, we never fix the problem. And so what the plan also outlines is what we need to do in prevention to stop violence against women and children occurring. What we need to do in early intervention. So how do we stop it getting to the point where women are fleeing a hugely violent situation in their home? Obviously what we do with response, but also that path to healing and recovery. One of the things that victim survivors have clearly told us that what happens after you leave a violent situation, what happens after that is really important to whether you further experience harm, what happens to your wellbeing, and what happens to the trajectory of your life. So those four areas are really covered, and what they will do is make sure that investment, whether it's other organisations, or whether it is actually through states and territory governments, but it's all pulling in the same direction. And there's to be a separate plan for First Nations people, and that's a co-design process. Explain what that is. How does that work? Yeah, so under the national plan, we've then got to start drilling down into actions. So what are the tangible actions we can take? And we've already as a government taken a number of those tangible actions, like introducing legislative requirement for paid domestic and family violence leave 10 days. But under the action plans, there will be a specific standalone Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander action plan that is being led by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people themselves. Because what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women have said is they want to have self-determination on the responses that work. They know what works within their community, and so they want to lead the design work. And so we're partnering with them to work on what actions need to be taken. Already there's been some actions taken. I visited Alice Springs. We responded to the desire of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations expanding some of the programs that were working well. But this action plan underneath the national plan will drive investment that, on things that we know will work, that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and children have told us will work. Obviously, all the stats tell us there's a really urgent problem in a lot of communities. And while obviously co-design and consultation is absolutely imperative for the reasons that you outline, it also slows down a process, it slows down a landing point. So you're the minister. How do you balance those two imperatives of having been consultative and allowing communities to lead, but also getting the result? I think that's a really important question because action does need to be taken now. And there are some obvious things that communities have been called for that we are funding. I've certainly been working very much with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council to give them the resources and support to do this work. But I have also indicated to them that we need to get on with this and we need to have action. So we are working very closely with them. But we also need to recognise, particularly for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and children, they have an intersection of not only family and domestic violence, but there is racism, there is systemic discrimination, and they are some of the things that we have to change as well. Yeah, exactly. On this podcast, Kate Jenkins, who's the Sex Discrimination Commissioner, said to me in March of 2021, we're at a turning point in this country when it comes to violence against women. She's worked in this field her entire professional life, and that was her judgment that we have finally reached a turning point. What are you saying? Well, the statistics about violent incidences and reports particularly of sexual violence as well have not changed. One of the challenges, though, is with prevalence data. You cannot rely on prevalence data alone because one would hope that with more community support, community awareness, friends, families saying, I think you might be in this violent situation, one would hope that people would reach out for help more, so you can't always rely on the prevalence data to get a good understanding if things are changing. So it's hard for me to judge. We still know the statistics are at pretty significant levels of what's being reported. So I'm not sure we have, in my view, turned the corner yet, but there are some green shoots, and I would say that community attitudes have changed significantly. Calling out sexist behaviour has improved. And so I do think that some of those sort of attitudes that lay the foundation for that gender inequality and that leads to the perpetration of violence against women has actually changed. And so I think there is a sense of hope. I wouldn't want to be all dreary and say, there isn't a sense of hope, there is a sense of hope, but a lot more work does need to be done. And it is challenging if we look at the area of consent, for example. Still a lot of work to be done there. But the other thing I'm quite heartened about is young people are up for this conversation. Young people are up to talk about gender inequality. Young people are up to talk about consent and what respectful relationships look like. So I am heartened by the fact that these are not as taboo subjects as they used to be. OK. Let's put your psychologist hat on for me for a minute. And I'm not saying that you need to sort of quote academic papers or anything. It's all right. It's not a pop quiz. But I am just really interested, right? So I'm interested in what the literature tells us about what works and what doesn't. At two levels, because obviously, as you've referenced, it can't all just be mopping up at the other end. There's a prevention piece. So what works in a prevention piece? And then what works in the sense of a successful intervention? Because you mentioned, you know, a critical part of the plan is that element of how do you turn your life around if you're a survivor of these situations, right? Rather than sending yourself back into the familiar zone of harm, either because you've got no other economic opportunities or options or because you re-traumatise yourself because it's familiar, right? So what works in a prevention sense and also in that sort of intervention frame? Well, in terms of a prevention, it actually goes back and I haven't shied away from this. And that is what drives gender-based violence is gender inequality. So in the prevention space, it very much is working to put forward positive role models for children about men and women and positive relationships. One example of that is sort of the rigid masculinity, I think we'll call it, where boys will be boys. That's just what they do. Those types of conversations, role models, is actually so important in prevention that if you can get positive role models, that that is critically important. The other element, so that's broadly about intervening early on and promoting positive male and female and role models. The other part very much is with children who have been victim survivors themselves. The developmental trauma, if it isn't dealt with, can obviously lead to generational perpetration. And so it is a really big challenge that we do need to have programs that do heal children and do intervene, particularly with boys and young men who have a witness and been part of family and domestic violence. So they are a couple of areas where intervention and is really important for prevention. But it does come back to that inequality and that perception that men are more powerful or have more power than women and girls. And so it is getting to tackle some of those stereotypes are so important. And I have been in the past sort of criticised because why are you focusing on this when people are under real risk? And it's true, it's true. There are people that are in danger and we want them to get the support that they need. But if we're going to turn this round, this is the type of stuff the evidence says we must tackle. And is this new plan and the emphasis on those elements, is that different from what has been pursued under the predecessor plans? Yeah, it has absolutely been elevated in terms of its importance. Prevention was in there, but certainly the role that men can play in terms of positive role models has been elevated. But the other bit that's been elevated that actually goes to your second question has been perpetrator accountability. And so when we talk about intervening, yes, we need to look at how we support the victim's survivor. But actually, a very important part of the puzzle is how we change behaviour of the perpetrator. Because if we recognise that it's not just always one violent incident that happens at the end, it is a lot of behaviours, not always physical, but emotional abuse, financial abuse. So is there a way we can actually get in early and intervene with the perpetrator in ways that changes their behaviour and gets them to take accountability? And that is the really big piece, that if you can get that right, that's what really helps break the cycle of violence. And is that phenomenon well studied in terms of... Because obviously, if you're dealing with a situation, you've already pointed to intergenerational behaviour, replication and trauma and all of those complexities, right? If that's the only world you've known, trying to sort of invent another world when you're an adult, in a psychological sense. And this is why I'm asking you, because you clinically can answer this question for me. I'm not practising at the moment. I've got to... You've got this professional background, which I'm respecting in the conversation, so I'm actually really interested. Right? Is it well studied? What does the literature tell us about recidivism in these sorts of behaviours? Yeah, I mean, the programs themselves, there are some really good programs, there's some that need to be improved, so it's got to make sure. But there is still more evidence that is needed to be collected in what works. And I'm very keen to see Australia contribute to that evidence base. Very keen. I mentioned in my speech today that I would like to see a perpetrator study being done, not just on prevalence, there is some information about prevalence, but about what works, what helps to change that behaviour. So I think while there is some evidence of what those programs can look like, I think more evidence needs to be collected. And so I think there's an opportunity for us as a country to do that work and actually get a much better understanding so that we know that the interventions... Now, that's not to say we should stop some of the interventions because there are elements that have demonstrated just in the data that they've collected work, but to really understand the ingredients of what facilitates change. You know, always empathy is part of this, and that is not always easy, but it can be done. So there's work around how you best support people, have empathy, and often violence occurs when you don't have empathy for the other person. So there's some ingredients in there, but more work definitely needs to be done. But you referenced this a moment ago. It's sort of fiscally speaking, it's a bit of zero sum, all of it, isn't it? I mean, you've got a finite funding window. I mean, we can't, sadly, devote every single taxpayer's dollars to this horrendous problem. So you've got to make judgements within your fiscal envelope, right? Like, how much do you study the phenomenon? How much do you make sure that crisis centres have got enough money to stay open? You know, et cetera, et cetera. How do you weigh those judgements? Look, it's a really difficult circumstance because local frontline services are always crying out for more help. So it is about trying to make sure that we are allocating resources in all of those four domains. And that's why the National Plan is so important, because it says, it really uses research to say you need to address all four parts of the plan. So it's a check, it's, you know, check and balance to say, look, we do need to put resources into these sorts of things if we're going to make a difference, because otherwise it's going to keep going around. One of the good things about this plan is that it isn't just the Commonwealth coming down on top of the states and territories. States and territories invest significant resources in this area too. And what this plan does is quite rightly clearly define roles and responsibilities, which is really important because, you know, I know the sort of reaction is often, we'll just go and fund this and it's a duplication of something being done in the states and territories. By having states and territories sign up to this plan, sign up to the action plans, it does know that our resources are all pulling in the same direction. So if the Commonwealth is putting more into prevention and because there's a need for a national campaign on awareness, that allows the states and territories to make sure their resources are going in other places. And we're not duplicating the investment, because that's what can happen from time to time. There's sort of this big response need and everyone throws money at it. But if it's not done in a coordinate or indeed a consistent way, if the awareness piece isn't consistent language, then we've got a problem. So that's why the work that the Attorney General is doing on coercive control as well is really important. A national definition so that we understand it, some national principles around coercive control, so that, you know, we're all talking about coercive control. What does it actually mean and how do we best respond so that we're all pulling in the same direction? But it's sort of interesting, you know, that you're right to point to, you know, work that colleagues do elsewhere, right? In the states, obviously, Mark Dreyfus is AG looking at those, that issue specifically, but like sort of again, trying to... I don't want to be Dolly Downer either in this conversation, but it sort of does my head in right. It's such a profound problem and there are so many different contributory elements to it that it is sort of... Fixing it is beyond the scope of a single social services minister, isn't it? I mean, you know, it's sort of like... Absolutely. It's so... Do you wake up and just feel futile? No, that's not what I mean, but it's... You know what I mean? Absolutely. Well, you... Absolutely. And women safety ministers sat around the room and agreed to this plan, but many of them had to take it through their cabinets and we took it through our cabinet to get the buy-in of all ministers around the table. And that's why I think the plan's been really important as a... The real underlying driver being so clearly spelled out that gender inequality is a big driver. So the investment is about trying to tackle a lot of these areas and put driving investment where it needs to go. But a whole of government commitment to gender inequality, both at the state and the federal level of addressing it, does feel that addressing this in the long term is not as insurmountable as it may seem. Yeah, and I understand why... I understand what you're saying there, that it's sort of like... Part of the sort of insurmountability, if that's even a word, sort of previously has been, well, do we all have the same sort of values response to this? But there's also practical things. I mean, it's sort of like then you get... As you sort of drill down further and further, you get into... You need different responses with policing. You need different responses. Well, you basically need to look very closely at the family court, which is politically diabolical for any government. I mean, we've seen that whole debate play out for the best part of 20 years. But, you know, that's sort of one of the accelerators sitting behind a number of these scenarios that we're talking about, right? You know, I agree with you that this sort of sea change is getting everybody to see it through the same lens, but there's still so many barriers to sort of dealing with this substantively. So how do you bulldoze the barriers? Yeah, well, that's a really good question. I'm not going to pretend there's any easy answers. What I would say is, in this national plan, we clearly call out some of the system barriers. We haven't shied away from the family court as a barrier. Now, there's no magical fix-all that's going to fix it immediately, but the fact that we've identified that in the plan, we've identified housing, we've identified the social security system, we've actually been honest about some of the barriers, the system barriers of getting through a system. We have talked about law enforcement being better equipped to deal with these things. I mean, when the statistic is 5,000 call-outs to police a week, now they need to be well trained in that when they're dealing with so much. So I think we've been honest about the broader problems, but going to your questions, well, how do you fix all of this? Well, you've got to at least have a goal and take steps, chip away at actually making a difference in these things. And I think by being honest that it's not just this individual problem, there's these other systems that do interact with it. There's no overnight solution, but recognising that I think is a really important first step. Well, it's certainly better than the alternative. That is true. Well, they haven't always been fully recognised in a lot of these things. No, no, no, no, I'm paying the point. It is more than an aspiration. It is actually, are we looking at the problem in the same way and are we working in the same direction in order to fix it? So it's not nothing, but it's not all the things either. No, it's not all the things either. But there have been, for example, steps from the Commonwealth's perspective in this budget around police training and law enforcement training and legal professional training once we've settled on the principles of coercive control. So there is Commonwealth money that works in with the state and territories around that. So I think you shouldn't underestimate when it is in light that there isn't steps towards doing that. Will the whole police force be adequately trained next year? Probably not, you know, let's be honest about that. Probably not in every circumstance. But it is about directing investment. And we've seen that, as I said, in this budget. There has been, for example, an elevation of sexual violence in this plan because it is gendered in nature. What's that driven? That has driven more investment into working women's centres so that there's somewhere to go to talk about sexual harassment, sexual violence in the workplace. So it does drive, as you work towards these things, it does drive investment. Yes, it doesn't get fixed overnight, but it is all about pulling in the same direction. Yeah, but I mean, I'm sort of only... I'm not really suggesting to you that it can be fixed overnight. That's not really the point. Although your plan, does it not, has this sort of ambition to kind of eradicate in a generation, right? Yeah, yep. Yep, it does. She says, on this side of the road. Yeah, no, it does set a pretty ambitious plan. And I have said it's pretty ambitious. But I mean, the one thing I would say to people is we don't say, yes, there's going to be road crashes and we were OK with that. We're fine with that. We don't mind a few injuries, a few deaths on our road. I mean, all states and territories take a zero road toll approach. And what we're saying is we're not saying we're going to do that tomorrow. We've given ourselves a generation. But I think it really is a line in the sand because I think about my children and I think children born today and my children's children. I mean, we just can't have them dealing with this issue for generations to come. We need to say we've got to take responsibility now. And that's what this is doing. And just quickly, I will just ask you about the regulation of gambling because I wanted to focus the conversation predominantly on the plan. But I know there is a lot of community interest about this and there has been a development this week where you've put forward some more, I would say, realistic taglines about anyway. Just why don't you tell people what's what's happened and then I've got a question for you. Yeah, look, what we've announced or we've notified online wagering companies is that from March next year, they are required to put proper taglines that actually are embedded in research that have shown that get problem gamblers to think twice before they place a bet. So instead of the gambling responsibly tagline, which, you know, quite frankly, I think we've all become very immune to, there will be taglines like you win some, you lose more. There's seven different taglines that online wagering companies will have to rotate because one of the other pieces of evidence shows that if the message becomes stale, then people don't pay attention. So there'll be a requirement to rotate these over a 12 month period. And in addition to that, in longer ads, there has to be a call for action. So what can you do? So these are new regulations that have been agreed to with the states and territories. And I would like to really acknowledge there is a regulatory framework that doesn't give the Commonwealth power. It doesn't really give the states and territories power. So it does require really careful cooperation and that has occurred. And so we've sent notification that online wagering companies will have to implement this. This is actually part of a broader suite of reforms signed up to with the states and territories, the national consumer framework. And I'm working towards getting the last bits of that done. Once they've been implemented, there is a question about what comes next. And I know that my state and territory colleagues are very keen, and I'm very keen to meet and start discussing how the framework has been implemented. And what can we do next to minimise that harm of online gambling? I'll just consider this an audience question because I expressed some views about this change on social media this week, just sort of like, oh, thank God, that's finally happened. And I got hit with a volley of responses from readers and users with people saying, well, why don't we just ban the ads? Look, that is an issue that the House of Representatives standing committee is actually looking into. They're looking at a range of measures that could govern online gambling, online wagering about looking at problem gambling. I mean, for me, what is most important to me, and I'll work with my state and territory colleagues on that, is what the evidence shows us minimises harm to people. So what we know is there's some people that like a punt, and it's not for me, but some people do like a punt, and it doesn't cause them any harm. But we know that Australia has one of the highest per capita losses of online wagering. And so we do need to actually make sure that we are minimising harm. So I want to work in a really constructive way about what will minimise harm for online gamblers and prioritise those measures. We know that these taglines make a difference. They research with over 8,000 participants. They are embedded in two years worth of research. They actually are evidence based, and so for me, that was why that is a priority. But over time, I'll work with my state and territory colleagues about how we do minimise harm. The same time for those people that want to have a punt, it's obviously something they can do, but it's those people that their losses, they actually are not able to manage that we need to support. Yeah, so maybe? Well, it's not for me. It's not for me. There is a process of what the states and territories want to make as their next priority. Some of the other things that have been implemented recently have actually been activity statements. So often people lose track of how much they've won and lost because it's on their credit card and they're not paying attention. Now online wagering companies have to put up activity statements every month. So people understand and it's in red whether they've won or lost. Oh, and they send them, do they, to users? They do. They send them to your email when you register and they pop up or they are available when you log on. So that's a really important reminder of in the last month, what's happened, how much have you lost? So because people do lose track. The other thing we're looking to implement over the next few months is actually because at the moment, if you go to the pokies, you can self exclude yourself from land based gambling that will be introduced for online wagering sometime in the coming months. So that you'll be off to exclude yourself from online wagering. And so that self exclusion plays a role. So all of these, none of these are silver bullets, they all play a role. So this is certainly not the only measure that we've taken, but we'll keep working, like I said, with the states and territory colleagues on what actually makes a difference. OK. Anyway, hopefully that's an answer for a number of people who came at me this week. And I imagine came at you. I mean, I have to say, you know, I do understand that, you know, I certainly find the ads annoying too. So I can understand the frustration that people have. Well, it seems to be there seems to be considerable frustration with it out there anyway. So paying that, remember, the house always wins, guys. Thank you for your time, Amanda. I appreciate it. It's been a busy week and I appreciate you giving the time to the listeners. Thank you, you guys for listening. Thank you to Alison Chan, who's producing this week. Thank you to Molly Glassie, who's the AP, and we will be back next week.