 This is The Guardian. When the invasion started, I thought, ah, this is going to give Scott Morrison a huge leg up. Khaki elections tend to work quite well for incumbents and the assertive adversarial language that the Prime Minister is using and his Defence Minister are using, I suspect going to resonate well with the electorate and I think they are potentially going to be dangerous for our international relations. Hello everyone and welcome to Australian Politics. You're with Catherine Murphy, the host, and with me this week is the wonderful John Blackslund who is Professor of International Security and Intelligence Studies at the ANU. John's at home in Canberra. Hi John. Hi Catherine, thank you for the warm welcome. It's all good and with me in the pod cave here in the Parliament House Studio is the lovely Daniel Hurst who is of course Guardian Australia's Foreign and Defence Correspondent and I reckon regular listeners will probably be onto the topic we're going to discuss this weekend which of course is the conflict in Europe and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. So John, with all complicated stories I reckon it's always best to start at the beginning. So what are the origins of this conflict that we've seen play out horrifyingly over the last sort of week or so? So let's go back a few hundred years and think about why Ukraine has millions of Hungarians, why it has a mixture of Russian Orthodox, Russian speaking Ukrainian citizens and why it has others who are more aligned with the Roman Catholic Church. Despite generations of purported atheism under communism, this still resonates as a big issue and of course the linguistic residue of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and let alone of the Polish Empire of hundreds of years ago, the residue of which is littered across much of Western Ukraine. But at least for history that most of us can get our heads around going back to the start of the Russian Revolution and the establishment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Ukraine featured in that space as one of the socialist republics and did so for a long time with Crimea despite it being a critical piece of real estate for Russia, having been assigned to Ukraine as what was perceived back in the good old days of the Cold War as an inseparable part of the Soviet Union which was all about Russia. The others were really peripheral add-ons to the great Moscovite Empire writ large if you like in which Russian was the lingua franca if I can use a Latin term. In 1991 of course we saw that the Soviet Union literally dissolved. The Commonwealth of Independent States that emerged from it was not nearly as tightly bound as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the USSR and there's no going back to the USSR despite what the Beatles might have said. What happened was in the days of Boris Yeltsin there was a sense and even Mikhail Gorbachev a sense that Ukraine could be let go and it would remain a friendly nation along its border as a bit like the relationship between Australia and New Zealand or Canada and the United States where essentially you're still speaking the same language, you still got broadly the same outlook on the world and you're broadly speaking partners in industry, in economics and in security. Along the way the unipolar moment then emerged, the United States came out pretty much unchallenged. History was supposed to have ended according to Francis Fukuyama and disarm and really a few problems emerged, a few peacekeeping challenges, a little bit of a problem down in the Balkans with the unraveling there and slowly you got Russia getting a sense that the West wasn't really committed to being a security partner with Russia. For a while there's a sense that NATO expands and there's an appetite for many, Warsaw Pact dissolves, Warsaw Pact being signed in Warsaw of the former Soviet occupied satellite countries that they took off Germany at the end of the Second World War, formed the Warsaw Pact roughly about the same time as NATO is forming, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in part a response to that kind of sense that both sides feared that the other was going to actually trigger a nuclear war first. We saw that with the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 and the exercise Abel Archer in 1983, NATO exercise designed to test the ability of NATO to respond to a Soviet nuclear attack but which was read by the East Germans and Soviets as the precursor operation to a launch of a nuclear attack. Thankfully, I noticed that show Deutschland Trao and Arcee shows, a great show on the SBS on how thankfully an East German spy was able to get the message across. No, it's not, it is just an exercise. They're not actually going to fire nukes actually. Of course, there was a group thing going on there in the East that the dastardly West was going to do this. And that sense of the dastardliness of the West and of NATO kind of it lapsed for a little while in Russian thinking, but for 45 plus years, 45, 47 years depending on how you count it, countries of Eastern Europe, the former Warsaw Pact had really kind of only grudgingly been part of the Soviet Empire. And as soon as they had an opportunity to join the NATO club, they ran across the border into the arms of NATO. And this of course is galling to the Russians. The former great mighty Soviet Empire was being whittled away. And to a large extent, this is America's doing, but it's not just America's doing. These are countries that democratically elected government who are just pleading to join NATO because they are seeing still on their border, a Russia that through the 90s is a kleptocratic oligarchic, it's pretty lawless, becomes more constrained under Vladimir Putin, but becomes pretty darn authoritarian. And so we see the attack, the way the Russians respond to Chechnya in the mid 1990s and you look at the city of Grozny and you think, man, the Russians, they know how to destroy a city, urban military operations in the urban terrain. We talk about it in very nice, cute, antiseptic terms. The Russians just destroy the city. And Berlin 1945, they've got the art down pat. So this sends chilling shivers down the spines of the Eastern Europeans who aren't yet part of NATO. So the NATO expansion keeps going. So the question is chicken or egg, is it American hubris? Yes, partly. Is it Eastern European fear of an authoritarian Russia? Yes, partly. And is it deep set Russian paranoia? Yes, partly. The combination leaves you with the slowly expanding NATO, which includes Poland, includes the Czech Republic and Slovakia, formerly Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and of course, the Baltic states, the Latvian, Lithuanians and Estonians. I'm being a bit flippant here, but who would have thought seriously that the Baltic states would be part of NATO? When you think about it now, when you look back now, you think, really, how defensible are those little states on the edge of Russia, right up the sandwich, right near St. Petersburg, states that are actually partly populated by Russians, ones that are deeply connected on many levels to Russia, but which the ethnic Latvians, Iranians and Estonians viscerally resent from the dark days of the Soviet era. So come along and then the offer is made to Georgia and Ukraine to maybe join. And of course, these countries are particularly in the western ends, less Russian, more European in their language, their culture, their religion. They love the idea. The idea of being part of NATO and not beholden to the whims of an increasingly ruthless and authoritarian president in Moscow is a pretty attractive proposition. Now, throw in the mix a little bit of racism, a little bit of fascism, and a little bit of xenophobia, and you have an awful brew, the prospect of a situation where the holding hands of NATO around the Kumbaya campfire is butting up against real politic and the barrel of the gun, where the Russians under Vladimir Putin are more nervous, more humiliated. Thucydides, the great ancient Greek historian writing about the Peloponnesian War, talked about fear, honor, and interests, and all three of them overlap beautifully in Ukraine for Russia. And so the idea that was floated out there that Ukraine, well, why shouldn't it be part of NATO? Of course, if Ukraine is going to be part of NATO but Russia isn't, this sends a deeply worrying signal to Russia. So it does raise some questions here about how do we let ourselves get to this position without thinking through how the Russians would view it? What could possibly go wrong? We're living it, yeah. And I mean, that's fascinating, really, that look back of, you know, it's sort of like a slow moving car crash, isn't it, really? Train wreck, we're staring at it. We're just watching it slow motion, yeah. Yeah. So let's whip through some obvious things now that are sort of on everybody's radar as a consequence of events over the last week or so. Why don't we start with, because obviously the West's initial response to the invasion of Ukraine has been sanctions. Will that work? And also, obviously, sanctions, if effective, will impose a great deal of privation and suffering on the Russian people. So what are the consequences of that flowing back through the Russian system? So there's two questions, really, John. Will that work? And what's the impact in Russia? So in the literature on sanctions, there is a deep held skepticism as to their efficacy. There is a broadly understood view, and my colleagues here at the ANU have written on this, Brendan Taylor has written on it, his PhD was on it. Sanctions rarely work. You require a level of coordination and resolve that few sanctions are able to foster and then maintain. Now this may prove that wrong. I'm not holding my breath. I a few days ago was advocating for what was then being considered the tailored application of Mchnitzkiak type principles against key players. I was really a bit worried about going there with SWIFT, International Transactional Coding Arrangements. My concern is that we may be biting off more than we can chew, the ramifications of which we have not fully thought through. Russia still is, while it is an economy that's almost the same between Australia and Canada in size, it actually controls for the Europeans some key resources, particularly oil and gas that are not nice to haves, they must haves in the absence of which they face bordering on cataclysm. The talk of ratcheting up to absolute sanctions is easy to say from Washington or perhaps London where they've still got North Sea gas. If you are sitting in Berlin or elsewhere in cold but gas dependent Europe where that gas comes from Russia, mostly through Ukraine still at the moment, but essentially from Russian oil fields, oil and gas fields, this is a price that you have not fully thought through about how you're going to pay. That is really worrying. It's very interesting to see the new chancellor of Germany who took over from Angela Merkel, who initially appeared to be really prepared to follow Angela's angle, if I can play that pun, on maintaining a relationship with Russia that was about engaging Russia with a view to pacifying Russia, with a view to fostering a mutually dependent economic relationship through the oil and gas pipeline deal. He has, Oleg Scholz has stood up in the last couple of days and if he follows through on it, what he says marks a significant inflection point, a turnaround that will potentially see Germany play a leading role in Europe, the likes of which we have not seen for the better part of a century. No, exactly. You've anticipated, I wanted to take us there because there's some interesting realignments and relationships that are sort of in evidence as a consequence of these events. There's the German relationship that you highlighted or the German posture, which is really deeply interesting. Also, there's the relationship between Putin and Xi Jinping in our own region, so that sort of access between China and Russia. What do you make of that, John? Peter Scheimer in The Tragedy of Great Conflict, I think that's how he called the book, talked about the balance of powers on the Eurasian landmass. Recently he has revisited this in a couple of articles in the US Journal of Foreign Affairs. He's been lambasting the Biden administration for misreading Russia and castigating the United States and administrations ever since the fall of the Berlin Wall for the failure of imagination to re-invisage the relationship with Russia in more positive terms. By allowing the encroachment on to the former Soviet Empire come in a zero sum sense, in a zero sum game at the expense of Russia, and that generating enormous pushback. When you think about Mieszczymer's broad concept of the balance of great powers, it was an esoteric concept that reflected the kind of ivory tower debates of which I love to participate in, but which are slightly detached from the real world. This discussion now is bringing it really down to the pavement. The rubber is well and truly hitting the road, because all of a sudden, as we think about the great power dynamics in East Asia, and the worries about what might be happening around Taiwan, Russia features more prominently than ever. The question then is, and this is what Mieszczymer argues, is that why have we not spent the last two decades weaning Russia off China? In an inverse relationship to what Nixon and Kissinger did in 1971, visiting Beijing to woo Mao Zedong away from the communist embrace with the Soviet Union, it had fallen away by that for a decade by that anyway, to be fair. But to make an arrangement with China, which as we know happened, Gough Whitlam had gone only days before to just a little aside here, Catherine, very interesting for domestic politics for Australia, we think about this. Gough went to Beijing, Peking as we called it then, only days before Henry Kissinger went. He came back and Billy McMahon then that a long standing prime minister of Australia who won so many elections, oh, hang on a minute, no, he didn't. Billy McMahon, who lampooned Gough for daring to, being a traitor, for going to see the Chinese communists in Peking, as he called it, only days later having egg firmly planted on his face when the news breaks that Richard Nixon's doing a deal with Mao as well. So I say that aside because this is the great power dynamics that have not been played, that we haven't seen a flipping of the great power dynamics like this since 1971, quite an extraordinary event, quite an extraordinary event. So the Olaf Scholz dynamic in Germany and what seems to be a crystallizing of resolve in the NATO space to not bicker anymore, not shy away from actually the real politic that has been brewing for the last few years, the storm clouds that should have been patently clear in 2014 when the little green men started taking non Donbass and shooting down Malaysian airliners over Ukraine. Should have been crystallizing their thinking, well, it was still, no, let's just keep the blinkers on, let's pretend that's not happening and keep on offering expansion of NATO, even though, and this the other irony here, Catherine, really interesting. NATO is a shadow of its former self. The NATO today, I saw a graph and I can't remember quite the numbers, but it showed that NATO battalions and tank battalions of 1989 compared to 2020 or something like that, it's just a shadow of its former self. So this idea that Putin's been spouting about NATO being a threat, it's like, give me a freaking break. NATO is nothing. NATO can barely protect itself, defend itself, let alone coordinate its actions. Now, the same can't be said, to be fair for the United States, but the United States has no appetite for this, they're trying to pivot to Asia for crying out loud. John, can I cut in while we're on the pivot to Asia? What do you make of China's positioning on this? Obviously, China's abstained twice when it comes to UN Security Council resolution and the General Assembly, but didn't vote in Russia's favor either. There was a bit of language at the beginning about this is not the situation we'd like to see, but not using the word invasion. They've continued to trade with Russia, of course, and just at the start of the Winter Olympics, Putin and Xi announced a partnership where nothing was off limits. But it seems in the last few days, China's also been emphasizing a message of wanting to play some sort of peacemaker role. It's not clear exactly what that is yet, and whether their actions will match that. But what do you make of China's positioning on all this? That's a great question because you look at the UN General Assembly resolution and the UN Security Council, China's got a veto right on the UN Security Council, they abstain. And here we are with the UN General Assembly, I'm just looking at the chart here, looking down the list at China, and it abstains again. 141 deploring Russia, 5 against, 35 abstained, including China. And China's keeping a salubrious company with Iran, Iraq, and that's Lao People's Democratic Republic, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua. But yes, understandably, they've done a deal with Putin. We know that from the negotiations that we understand took place around the Winter Olympics. My sense is, and of course, this is all opaque, and it's a bit of educated guesswork as to exactly what's going on, but my sense is that Xi must be very uncomfortable about how this is unfolding in Ukraine at the moment. Because one assumes, one gets the impression that Putin must have convinced him that this would be a pretty easy rollover, and that all it needed to do is do what he did in the first couple of days. And that's kind of hit a few military targets, send a message of resolve, and have Zelensky do what his Afghan counterpart did back in August last year, and take the first flight out of Dodge on his way to a cinecure somewhere, perhaps in the Middle East in Dubai, somewhere where he could stash a lot of money and live a nice lifestyle, and hang the consequences. And Zelensky didn't do it. What the hell? What's going on? And he's being the thespian, and to quote, play on Shakespeare, all the world's a stage. He knows this well. He's playing it like a fiddle. Zelensky is masterfully rallying Ukrainian resolve against Russia and Russia's authoritarian militarist streak in a way that I think is rattling in the halls in Beijing as well. This has got enormous implications. The resolve that the Germans are showing, the strength of unitary thinking in Western halls of power must be worrying to Beijing, to President Xi, because this is not the plan. And what this means for what President Xi wants to do in East Asia, they will be scratching their heads, because of course we know that for one thing, the view that Vladimir Putin aired on the point of invasion where he basically denied Ukrainian statehood. It's like, holy dooly. Do you realize the implications of that Vladimir? And Xi must be completely aware of the ramifications. What does this say about Tibet? Yeah, and Taiwan, obviously. Yes. Let alone the South China Sea. Might is right. Is that the only way we're doing things now? Because if that's the case, if we're not even going to keep a fig leaf of adherence to international protocols, UN resolutions and international norms about the way international statecraft operates, the way it has for the last 80 years or so since 1945, if we're not going to even pretend to do that anymore, because this is what the Americans did in Iraq in 2003. They maintained the fig leaf of the UN Security Council resolutions from the first Gulf War, which hadn't been rescinded. And that technically, from a legalese point of view, appears to have given the Americans enough of a cover to proceed and hang the consc- even though they wanted a new resolution back in March 2003, they didn't get it, but they had enough of a legal cover to proceed regardless. Russia's not even trying that. They're not even trying that this time. I was going to ask, since you've raised intelligence and we know all the issues with Iraq and how the intelligence was used, in the last few months, we saw US and the UK really release, or when I say release, disclose what their intelligence was telling them about Russia and Putin planning potentially to invade. I was wondering if you had any view on what the US goal was in terms of putting that information out in public over the last few months and whether that had any impact at all, because there seemed to be a different interpretation from the Germans and the French about the reality of whether he actually would proceed. Yes, no, exactly. See, the problem is that the WMD fiasco of 2003 so gravely damaged the credibility of the US intelligence system that they, 19 years later, have yet to fully recover. No one really believes the Americans when they start spouting things about intelligence revelations because of WMD. Now, to be fair, let's not forget, France and Russia also thought there was WMD in Iraq in 2003. The great irony is this the classic mistake of an intelligence analyst, which I teach in my honeypots and overcoats class, which is you don't mirror image, don't think your target thinks the way you do. They've got different cultural geostrategic dispositions that make them think about the world in a completely different way to you and I. Their world is not your world. It's not our world. It's very different. What we failed to do with Saddam Hussein is to remember that he'd fought a 10-year war against Iran and it was touch and go as to who would win. Now, he came out on top, but only briefly, and in that context was a deep set paranoia about daring to reveal that WMD didn't exist, that they were a straw man. Of course, what we failed to do is realize that. When he was huffing and puffing and pretending and refusing to confirm or deny, we were thinking it's proof. You see, he's still hiding them. He's still hiding them somewhere. We've got them there. We just got to find them. Not realizing that he was playing us. He was playing us to keep Iran at bay. Not realizing that his gravest threat was in fact not Iran. It was the United States of America. Reassigned that historical case, what was the aim of the US putting that information out? The credibility is still shot from WMD, but what we're seeing is because of Vladimir Putin's – he's a KGB man of old who loves his musketovka and his Dasein Fordmatzia. He loves it. He just completely floats his boat, playing games with people's heads. The Little Green Men was what it was back in 2014. The denial that the MH17 was shot down by a Russian book, that it was handled by people. We didn't have nothing to do with us. Someone else's problem. BS, but very effective BS. He was master of obfuscation, smoke throwing, and deflection. What we see is in fact, and to my mind, it's only crystallized in the last few days. I was skeptical as well. I must admit, in the lead up to the invasion, I thought, okay, the Americans are playing a bit of a game here, but what I realize now is that what they were doing is they were trying to uncover his musketovka. They were trying to play up because we see as we look at – as we try and look back at what happened in the first couple of days of the operation, it appears Putin was trying to make it easy to quickly topple Selensky, set up a new government, which is why it was light footprint in the first couple of days. Topple Selensky, make it look like this is a domestic tussle for politics and power. It's not really about the Russians. It's a domestic Ukrainian issue. What emerges is a Russian puppet. The revelations in those last few days were all about exposing the Russian tactics, about exposing their attempt to try and make the game sound like this is all very legitimate and nothing to worry about. Please move along, folks. It's all just internal domestic. Ukrainian issue and the Russians are interested and concerned observers happen to be mustering 190,000 troops on the border. Minor technicolor. Turned up with a couple of tanks. You mean, John, that the US was sort of trying to flush that out? That's exactly right, Catherine. That's what they were doing. We just wouldn't believe them because we've got a seared conscience, seared sense of experience of American untrustworthiness when it comes to major international revelations with purported intelligence. The shameful moment of Colin Powell at the UN putting up the pictures and photos of the trucks, the WMD trucks that were just half-baked concoctions with very low-grade human intelligence reports that were clearly spurious where a guy was being paid to lie effectively and then given far too much credence. We all fell for it. As I say, even the French and the Russians fell for this. Of course, it was Colin Powell. Of course, a trustworthy guy. He wouldn't lie, would he? Sadly, we're pushing right up against time here. I think Daniel had a specific question that he wanted to put to you about... About the equipment we're selling. This week, obviously, sanctions was last week in terms of Australia rolling out the sanctions. Obviously, we're not a big player when it comes to sanctions. We're just a supporting player in the sense. This week, there was an announcement that there'd be $70 million worth of lethal military equipment supplied. There was a globe master that left Australia yesterday with some supplies. We don't know exactly what was on it, but it's heading towards Europe. Do you have any insight into how difficult logistically it will be to get this equipment in there? Obviously, we're using our NATO partners. We're not flying in directly. What practical difference, if any, would the Australian suppliers make and how would it actually get in? I'm not privy to the details of what's being supplied, but we do know that a lot of other countries, NATO countries, are supplying arms and ammunition and other logistics support. It is bolstering the resolve and morale of the Ukrainian people and the Ukrainian forces to resist and to put up a darn good fight and make it very, very difficult for Vladimir Putin to get what he wants, which is a clean sweep. A quick turnover and establishment of a puppet regime in Ukraine and the establishment of an enclave in Donbass and in Crimea with a land bridge that is essentially going to crimp Ukraine, make it a smaller, less Russian state, but beholden to Russia with the part of the country more integrated into Russia. The problem here is that we're butting up against a man who is not mad, but dangerous and depends on how you view philosophically these issues, but borderline downright evil in terms of what he's prepared to do. The pain he's prepared to inflict. He, I think, is quite serious about toying with nuclear escalation and a no-fly zone would be across that threshold, in my view. Short of that, though, the indirect supply of munitions, logistics support, and so on, is probably not going to cross that threshold. It is going to certainly warm the cockles of the hearts of politicians in countries like Australia and Canada and across Europe and the United States, noting in countries like Canada, Australia to a certain extent, but Canada way more so, huge migrant Ukrainian community who are completely aroused, aroused by this experience and completely pressing the Canadians to double down on supporting the Ukrainian-Izhelinsky government. There's a similar dynamic here, and of course, this is playing into not my field of expertise, but domestic politics. There's enormous domestic political dimension to this, which my sense is that when the invasions started, I thought, ah, this is going to give Scott Morrison a huge leg up. Khaki elections tend to work quite well for incumbents, and the assertive adversarial language that the Prime Minister is using and his Defence Minister are using are, I suspect, going to resonate well with the electorate, and I think they are potentially going to be dangerous for our international relations. You mentioned there just, you thought that at first, as you've changed, John, over the last week, or do you still think it's a plus for the Morrison government domestically? I think it's too early to say, Catherine. I think he's banking on it being a plus, whether or not in the long run it will be, depends on exactly how ugly it gets in Ukraine and whether it spreads, and it's not beyond conceivable that it could spread. My concern is actually more local, regionally, I mean, and the great discomfort of our Indonesian neighbors, let alone other countries beyond Thailand. I know well and I'm mindful that they voted for the resolution, the UN General Assembly resolution, but probably reluctantly, probably under some pressure from the United States and others, the United States, maybe Singapore, and perhaps Australia as well, because they like Russia, Indonesia really likes Russia, Indonesia buys Russian kit quite often, and they have a bit of a, it's ebbed and flowed the relationship with Russia, obviously, but the Russians have been assiduously working the room in Jakarta to improve their relations. But for us, when we think about Australia's posture in the neighborhood, actually, our relationship with these countries are the most important. They're the most difficult, but most important, and we need to be not looking to send a megaphone message to Ukraine over the tops of our cringing Indonesian neighbors. We need to be thinking astutely about the ramifications, and I don't say I've got the answer here, I'm just saying, we need to be mindful day to day of how our neighbors are responding and being attuned to their sensibilities and looking to collaborate as effectively as possible with them, because our future, our security, our prosperity is inextricably linked with their destiny. Yeah, it's a really interesting point that I have not thought enough about in terms of the regional sensibilities. Look, I could go on for an hour and I would really enjoy it, but sadly, we can't, so I just want to end on this question, John. It's a quote that was in a piece that I read in The New Yorker at some time over the last 48 hours, where a Russian democracy activist was quoted posing the sort of $64 million question, really. If you had to make a prediction about this conflagration, do you think it will result in the end of Putin's reign or the end of the world? I mean, obviously, the latter point is a bit overstated, but you know what I mean. Is it most likely on the balance of history and current observation to rebound on Putin, or are we escalating towards conditions in Europe that we've not seen since the Second World War? So barring a barrier moment, barrier being- The guy shot in the barn. Extra judicially just taken out and removed by his colleagues who saw him as being too dangerous for the nation's good, despite being part of the communist system. Despite that kind of intervention by one of the inner circle of the oligarchy or him falling ill and incapacitated, I don't see him losing office. I see him having sufficient grip on power to ride the dragon through the storm. And that is, you know, sadly my view. I find the character quite odious, but I'm trying to be realistic about the prospects. At the same time, I also am mindful that there are cool and clever heads in many of the capitals that are engaged on these issues. So I also don't think that we are at a Stanley Kubrick moment, if you like, where a cowboy is riding the bomb down from the B-52. If I can use that image, it's one of my favourite movies, by the way. Yes, please use the image. That's fine. I think we have in people like Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Schulz, some very realistic power players in Europe who understand the risks and dangers of escalation over that threshold and the need to operate short of the threshold that would trigger that kind of escalation. Look, even Boris Johnson in his visit to the Baltics in the last couple of days has been saying, you know, no fly zones, we're not going there. There's been some relatively hawkish generals, even in Canada, that I've been listening and monitoring, that I've been listening to and monitoring, saying, oh, we should set up a no fly zone, you know, let's do it, you know, push back on the Ruskies. You know, that's just an inviting disaster. We have to be realistic about what the options are for Ukraine. The best I think we can do is help them indirectly and hope and work assidiously behind the scenes in collaboration with people like the Germans and the French and the Brits in Europe and the Americans and others, including if we can with China, to find an accommodation. But Russia, to be fair, even though Putin is odious, has a place in the pantheon, if you like, the power in the Eurasian landmass. It has to be accommodated. And Vladimir Putin's made this very, very clear. If you do not accommodate me, I will lash out. And he has lashed out out of a sense of his honor being trampled on, his fear of further encroachment and his perception of what is in Russia's interests. So it gets back to my Thucydidesian trinity, if you like, of fear, honor and interests. And I think that still resonates very, very compellingly to this day. Yeah. OK, well, I hate to say fatuously, we'll all find out, but we certainly will all find out as events continue to play out. John, thank you so much for your time. It is always so delightful to have a conversation with you and sort of look at the currents through history that bring us to these points in time. So I'm very grateful you made the time. Thank you to Daniel, who's been my sidekick here today. Very much appreciate that. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the executive producer of the show. Thank you to Karishma Luthria, who is cutting the show this week. And thanks to all of you for listening. We'll be back next week. Thank you, Daniel. Thanks, Catherine. Thank you.