 This is The Guardian. I think that the two factors to watch is the voting patterns of young people and also the number of people that have moved from cities to the regions through the pandemic and whether that has any impact on the voting profiles or some of the rural seats, which have been traditionally just owned by the Nats. Hello there, I'm Sarah Martin, Chief Political Correspondent for Guardian Australia, filling in while MIRF is on the campaign trail. Because yes, we are only two and a half weeks out from the federal election. Today, we're bringing you a panel discussion from the Guardian Essential poll. This is hosted by Progressive Think Tank, the Australian Institute, with analysis from Essential Director Peter Lewis. In the episode, we look at the large number of still undecided voters, the importance of women in deciding the next government, and how the cost of living is weighing on the minds of voters of all persuasions. This talk was recorded on Tuesday and it was moderated by Ebony Bennett, the Deputy Director of the Australian Institute. Ebony is about to ask me the first question. Sarah, I want to come to you first. You know, a week is a long time in politics and it's been a fortnight since the last poll position. As I mentioned, we've had, you know, Albo in ISO, and, you know, a few shenanigans internally for the Liberal Party. What are some of the things that stand out to you from the last two weeks? Well, I think we've definitely seen that the coalition, and Scott Morrison in particular, has been on the defensive. Of course, we had the issue over the Solomon Islands agreement with China. We've had divisions within the Liberals and Nationals over the net, and zero target whether or not there's a wriggle room for the party. We've had the zero target whether or not there's a wriggle room for that or not. And then, of course, we've had inflation figures come out which show that the cost of living is going up and a lot more than the budget papers forecast. So on all of those issues, even though, you know, I guess the conventional wisdom is the coalition wants to be talking about the economy and national security. Over the past week, the government has really been on the back foot on those two issues. And I think the reason that we've had the Albenizi being in isolation is one of the things, one of the positive things it has done for Labour is it has allowed them to really show other members of their team. And I think Jason Clare has been, you know, standing out as a star performer for them. And he's, of course, campaign spokesman. We've had Jim Chalmers take a more prominent role along with people like Katie Gallagher. So I think that's been sort of a positive for the Labour brand, if not necessarily directly for Albenizi. I don't think it's all the polls show, I guess, that him being in isolation hasn't really been too problematic for their polling numbers. Yeah. Pete, I did want to come to you on the polling numbers overall and really put, we're going to dive deep into, obviously, the dirty and essential results today. But I think Sarah's, you know, hit on a big thing there. You know, it's in a wider context. We're still seeing probably a lot of undecided voters. We've got the teal independence as another kind of a bit of a wildcard there. Can you just talk to us, because I know a lot of people were, you know, felt like the polls last time around really didn't do their job. And I know that's something that the whole industry kind of looked at. But just talk to us about that undecided vote, what the other polls are showing at the moment, and give that the context to the election before we dive into the details. Yeah, thanks, Yip. It's actually been interesting. As a result, I think of the unanimity of the polling miss in 2019, the different pulses have actually come up with different ways of thinking through the challenge of providing a load staff for the election and critically not predicting results. I want to push back whenever anyone says a poll predicts a result. All it does is say where we are now. So we at the Guardian Essential Report made the call that we were going to start placing undecideds in our sample. So our number today is 49, 45 with six undecided. Now, if you took those off, you'd have the impression one-sided past 50%. So they were like winning, which we just don't think is a healthy way of looking at it. So we've basically got 6% of the electorate who are undeclared. And another significant number, as I'll show you later, who's saying they could well change their vote. So our big change is we've kept the undecideds in. The new poll that Nye and Fairfax puts out resolve goes the absolute opposite way and doesn't let you say don't know. And their theory is that they're trying to replicate what happens when you're actually in the ballot box. Where don't know isn't an option. My beef with that is I think that's pumping up independence because I suspect independent becomes a default landing point if you don't know. Although time will only tell and I don't want to diminish the obvious rise in support for independence, particularly in those key seats. News poll is still doing the traditional formulation. So we've actually not just got different polls with slightly different results this time. And there is differences in the numbers. We've also got different methodologies underlying it. And I think that's healthy. Well, we might dig into the actual slides now. So kicking us off with this overall number, as you said, with the 6% undecided in the middle. Is there any change there from last fortnight? There's a little bit of a change around the edges. The other thing I should say for people listening on the Guardian podcast from home, you can go to essentialreport.com.au to look at these numbers. We'll show you the trends in a sec. So the baseline, as we said before, 49, 45, 6% undecideds. You guys can do your equations. You can work out what that would mean in the old style, but I'm not even going to grace it with language. Labor's primary vote is steady over the last fortnight. Coalition drops at a point, as we say every time, a point means nothing. Long-term trend lines made in something, 3% margin of error. So when you look at those lines, you should be looking at a line that is fatter than the single point line moving across the screen. And if you go to the bit, the only shift really was on that two-party preferred. And I think that was because of the amount of shift in different preferences. So last week it was 47, 46. With 7% don't know this week, it's 49, 45. With 6% don't know. Big picture that says that Labor has got a very solid base of people that are intending to vote for them. The coalition needs to either take some of the people that are saying they'll vote Labor and move them across the coalition column or convince those last 6% that haven't made a call yet. That's what the last week in the election is, or the last two or three weeks in the election will be all about. It's talking to uncommitted or non-committed voters who tend to be lower information, who tend to look at politics out of the corner of their eye, which is why it's not just the substance of the debates, but the images that come out of the daily news conferences that are going to be critical. It is also where I do think external events may have an impact. We'll dig in deeper a little bit to the cost of living bogey that's sitting there for the coalition in a moment. The other two that we've been running the last few weeks, and I don't want to spend everyone's time on graphs, but the two markers that are not voting in tension that have always been useful for pollsters in getting a sense of the mood, deserves to be re-elected or time to give someone else a go. 48-33, we think it's time to give someone else a go, but still 21% undecided. If you click to the next one, we've broken that down between people who also, between people who say their vote is definitely locked in and those that are softer, unsurprising, the softer voters are much more likely not to have formed a view yet, but you can see there that really the locked in vote at 50% of firm voters ready to give someone else a go. Sorry, I'll just correct you, Pete. I think you said 48-33 for views towards re-electing the Federal Coalition. I think it's 46-43 this week with 21 undecided for those playing along at home. I apologise. It's only I was good at numbers. But the other one, the one that is interesting this week where there's been movement, if we go one more slide, because the other companion piece, that is direction of Australia, right track, wrong track. That had actually opened up two weeks or in April to be a significant 46-37 split on Australia on the right track, which was starting to make me feel a bit of a caution that people might not be ready to change. Over the past month, that has shifted significantly. So a 5% drop in right track, a 6% increase in wrong track. So now in net terms, it's still 16% undecided. People are saying both that it's time to give someone else a go and a majority of people think Australia's on the wrong track. I suspect that's a direct call and response to the cost of living issues that we're seeing at the moment. I did want to come to cost of living, Sarah. As Pete said, we're going to have that potential interest rate rise. But certainly cost of living has been huge during this election campaign. And I feel like at the Labor launch on the weekend, we saw a real focus on addressing that in quite systemic ways. How do you think that's playing out in the election at the moment or this week, I guess? Yeah, look, it's interesting. I think Labor obviously has an answer to what it's going to do about cost of living pressures. It is putting forward policies on childcare, energy skills, and so on. And housing obviously was the big one at the launch on Sunday. I think in terms of the government, obviously they had their cost of living measures in the budget, but they're all very short term. And so that has sort of opened them up to criticism that the assistance that they're providing is limited and will leave people sort of high and dry later in the year once that relief winds up. And I think certainly the government is, you know, they're trying to argue that a change of government would mean more risk for the economy and are suggesting that a Labor government, like obviously one of their key attack lines is life won't be easy under Albanese, but there's not really any, you'll be shocked to learn that there's not a lot of substance to that. That's just a scare and sort of, I guess, what's the word I want? Like just sort of preying on people's vulnerability and uncertainty about the times ahead and the risk of change. I think whoever's in government, we're in line for rate rises. So, I mean, a lot of the stuff that we're hearing today from both leaders is just politics because really rate rises are going up, whoever's in power. And you know, Morrison has said that, you know, he's sort of trying to argue both sides of the fence. He's sort of saying, you know, the Reserve Bank is independent, you know, we don't have any control over what they do, but if a Labor government got in, that would impact how, you know, how the Reserve Bank might respond to economic challenges, suggesting that obviously economic management does play a role in monetary policy. So I think it's a tricky one and obviously Labor's not going too hard on the potential for interest rate rises because they know if they are in government and we have a series of interest rate rises over the next 12 months or over the next term of parliament, then, you know, they are going to potentially cop the heat for that as well. So they're both sort of trying to dance a delicate line on this. But, yeah, look, I think cost of living what was really interesting in today's poll is that people say that Labor is best placed to, or they are most trusted to handle those cost of living pressures, not the government. And I think it's just a general rule that if people are unhappy about their conditions, then naturally they look to the government of the day for that and ask them to take some responsibility and say to the government, what are you doing to make my life easier? Yeah. Well, diving back into those issues, perhaps, the first one is on climate change and then I think we've got cost of living up next. Yeah, this has been a wild, odd ride that we've been sort of charting for over a decade. I've only gone back as far as August 2016. But as you can see, you know, in a week where the National Party was walking away from the heroically modest ambitions of the Prime Minister on climate, the number of people believing the government's not doing enough was rising again. Again, it's not a historic highs of the bushfires in January 2020 when it was 62%, but it's back up close to 50%. Then you get a bunch of issues that we've looked at. Now, for those, again, on the podcast, you'll have to go into essentialreport.com.au and if you're at home, you're probably going to have to squint. But we put a bunch, what we're doing here is a test of both salience and trust. So the first slide is a salient slide and we asked people to rate on a scale of 1 to 10 how important various issues are. 47% of people are saying cost of living is a 10. And provision of public services is second at 37% of people giving that a 10. Job security 28, climate change 29%, relationship with China and the Solomon Islands 22%, reducing government debt 19%, both turn backs 18% and that lovely little debate about transgenders in sport 10%, giving that a number 10. Now, it flows through and it's almost an inverse on those that I think it's not important at all. So if you're looking at that on the screen, you can see that it gives you a really nice marker of the importance of the various issues being discussed. But if you go to the next slide, Ebony, then it is on those issues we've done in the same order, which party do you trust to manage the following issues? And as we can see, and again, we looked at this the other week, but it's extended, 40-30 labour on cost of living with 30, no difference. So that was a number one issue. Likewise, on improving public services, 44-26 labour, job security 38-29 labour, climate change 40-21. And it is only when you get to some of those issues that I guess you might argue as being more performative that the coalition gets back in the game. But even the transgender issue, those that on that issue, people would rather labour managing it, which means not trying to pump it up for cheap laughs and outrage rather than the coalition. So what does that say to me? It says that if this election is an issue's election, labour is well positioned. And then all you're left with is the leadership election, where you've got the better, the devil you know, versus the guy you still don't quite know. But here again, the majority of people say they want to vote on the issue is not the leader. Yeah, so just for people playing along at home, they essentially asked what was more important party policies or party leaders. And two thirds say a political party that has better policies for Australia compared to 20% who say a political party that has a leader who would make a better PM. So, Pete, as you were saying, you know, it's a clear preference there. Yeah. So wrapping all this together, the piece I've put up in Guardian today around the whole idea that Morrison is running basically on the better, the devil you know. My thesis is there isn't a lot of sympathy for the devil at the moment. Look, on one level, running on better, the devil, you know, must be incredibly liberating because you no longer need to defend your performance in any way because all you're saying is, yeah, yeah, I get it. I'm transactional. No one trusts me. I don't support a corruption inquiry. But look at the other guy. The problem is at the moment, that is all premised on the idea that the other guy is scary. Now, it seems to me the other point in that little story was that the whole adage is not just it's not just the bit of the devil, you know, the full quote is that, you know, you'd rather have a known bad thing happen to you than something unknown. And I guess the unknown bit is what they've been banking on and Labor's small target strategy up until now. And I think the launch has mean that it's no longer a small strategy has left that doubt. You'd rather have someone who you absolutely dislike than someone you don't know. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is the coalition's election strategy laid bare. Can I just can I just pipe up here, Peter, because I think your thesis doesn't neglect to mention like this is why the independents are doing so well because it's neither the devil, you know, or the devil, you don't know. It's like the third option. It's like the I don't know where that's that's why they're doing so well, because when you're out in the field and you talk to voters, they say like they've got this very, very firm view that they're both as bad as each other when they're looking at the major parties. And I just feel like this is such a phenomenon. And if we want an explanation for that, look at the negative campaigning that's going on between the two majors like people hate it. And it's been going on for such a long time that they've just gradually eroded their standing within the community. And so as far as the voters concerned, they're all devils. And hey, look at that independent over there. That's that's interesting. I've been interested in the way that the liberals have been attacking the teals. They've just been saying, again, no, they're the devil, too. They're the greens. They're actually they're fake. They're fake. They're not a real independent. And it does sort of feed into that pox on both your houses, which is a different lineage, obviously, and goes back to the integrity seems to be a huge issue along with climate. And at the beginning, we saw the New South Wales, one of the commissioners for IACAC there, really hitting back against the idea that the New South Wales IACAC is a kangaroo court, effectively labeling the prime minister of buffoon for saying so, but also highlighting the danger of undermining integrity commissions. I'm just curious what you think about the politics of that. It's really fascinating because you'd be forgiven for thinking that Scott Morrison was all but abandoning those inner city liberal members because on climate and on and on integrity, even on the amount of money that's been promised to those electorates. They've really vacated the field. And I think they've kind of decided that they'll just let those moderate liberal MPs run their own race. Obviously, Scott Morrison's physical presence doesn't help them because the anger directed towards him is white hot. But it's pretty extraordinary that given the promise on the integrity commission before the last election and given the you know, given internally, those moderate MPs were saying we need to deliver this or I'm going to be in strife in my seat. And that message was delivered in a completely crystal clear manner to the prime minister and the attorney general, Michaelia Cash. There was time to do something. Now, obviously, the feelings within the around the coalition cabinet table are so strong on this that they were unprepared to consider not even like introducing the legislation and debating amendments. I mean, they just they didn't even introduce the bill like they table to the the exposure draft, but they didn't they weren't even prepared to sit down and have the debate. And that was sort of much to the frustration of not just some of those MPs who are under threat, but the moderate liberal MPs in those seats under threat. But people like Brigid Archer and Bass, people like the outgoing MP for Ben along John Alexander, Celia Hammond over in WA. She's also facing a challenge. But this was this was an issue of great concern to those MPs. So it's sort of I find it staggering that that was a election commitment that Morrison was prepared to break. And, you know, if it really does come back to bite them and potentially loses them government, if we do get a handful of those independents, we'll want it to be up for negotiation. So I think that's been made clear. But by those teal independence, that an integrity commission would be one of their non-negotiables as they negotiate. Like if we're talking a hung parliament situation, that that's something they would be they would be demanding. So, you know, I think I think if if the government really does suffer and lose a handful of those teal seats, then the consequences of that are super interesting because there's sort of a realignment underway. Now, I think if the coalition loses those seats, but then doesn't pick up seats in the outer suburbs and metro areas where they're hoping to, like to try and offset those losses, then there's no what happens to the Liberal Party then they've kind of lost their centrist economic voters. And they haven't picked up the working class voters. They think they can they can win over, you know, to try and to try and balance that out. So, you know, it will change the shape, the nature and character of the coalition party room. If Josh Frydenberg loses his seat, then pretty much guaranteed Peter Dutton as leader. And, you know, even if Josh keeps his seat and the numbers in the party room change to the extent that there's a much more conservative bent, then we still may end up with Peter Dutton as opposition leader. So I think it's going to be really fascinating to see how that plays out. And I do get the sense that despite in previous elections, there's obviously always been talk about independents picking up some of these seats. There is a real there is real momentum for those candidates this time around in a way that I don't think we've seen previously, even though arguably climate change is not as heated a political issue as it has been in the past. And I know, you know, someone on the Morrison campaign was saying, oh, well, you know, the last election we were followed everywhere by climate protesters and we're not getting that this time. So, you know, they're suggesting that some of the heat has come out of it after their net zero commitment, but not if you look at those seats in those midst, reading the signals. It's actually an incredibly disciplined campaign by the climate movement, recognizing the impact of their activism last time, I reckon. So that's exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Can I just jump one thing that I'm interested in going one day? So the progressive pushback on the teals is if you're really successful, you are going to turn the coalition into a magga party, which at some point will have power in Australia and you're much better to have a liberal party with a progressive wing. So a liberal party that can deliver a prime minister like Malcolm Turnbull rather than a prime minister like Peter Dutta. Now, I'm interested in I'm interested in everyone's view on that. Like if you look at the ball in front of you go, these candidates have a much more progressive policy agenda, but I do think there is some merit in that analysis. Yeah, some merit. But, you know, it was a liberal party with plenty of moderates in it that also delivered Tony Abbott, you know, a conservative PM. So, you know, what the outcomes are, I think it's worth thinking about. But, you know, but it is remarkable that he's in a guarantee that you'll get a moderate. It is remarkable the way that Morrison's walking away from those seats. And, you know, even to Sarah's point, his vociferous attack on ICAC just takes a card out of any negotiation he would have with the teals if they do hold the balance of power. He's almost seems like he's pushing them to say Labor's the only alternative government that I could work with. I don't know if that's a cunning plan or if it's just more stuff up rather than conspiracy, but that's going to be the end point there. Brand deal post election. Sorry, go Sarah. I was just going to say to be like the Catherine D use issue as well, like all the moderates are like, just stop talking about it. I did want to come back to cost of living issues and the labor launch and Pete asking you about those issues. They are seen more as Labor's home turf. I think pending whatever the outcome is with the interest rate announcement later today cost of living still going to remain at the top of the agenda for a lot of people, even though the economy is kind of seen as stronger turf for the coalition. When it's in that frame of cost of living you've talked a lot more about how people trust labor more that's kind of shown in the polling results there. You know, Sarah mentioned the focus on on housing there was also pay equity announcements, there was other issues around health and age care and things like that. How much of these issues, you know, if they're at the top of the agenda for voters playing into undecideds breaking for labor in the last couple of weeks of the game. Again, I don't want to be in the prediction business, but people that have heard me before will know my theory that government changes in a way. I think the tides out on Morrison. I think there is a scenario and an interest rate rise will just sort of create the momentum that there will be a bit of a mood for change and for those that are undecided worried about cost of living, which is their number one issue disproportionately. Think about this. Labor, albeit modest policy agenda is about government doing stuff. It's about government taking shared ownership in a home for a low income worker. Morrison's is about letting the market work. If you look beyond the images of what the liberals are putting forward, it's it's not really policy. It's like targets based on economic modeling with no roadmap to actually get there. Whereas I think labor has gone more granular. So if you're an undecided voter looking at it at the end of the day and the kind of brand superiority has diminished through lived experience at the coalition just says we're the better economic manager. It actually makes you think that that could drive people away from the incumbent and, you know, break that devil, you know, and go with the unknown because at least there are a set of propositions that you can kind of hold on to. We might go to now questions from the audience. As I said, we've got about 800 people on the line with us today. Thank you so much for joining us. One of the first questions I want to come to might be for you, Sarah, and it's about preferences, essentially. Green saying that they're preferencing labor and not preferencing the coalition. But what else do we know about how parties are allocating preferences at the moment and and how important will that be? Yeah, so these things obviously all been nutted out by the parties. Once the tickets are printed, then, you know, the negotiations are fast and furious. I mean, some really interesting things like, for example, Dave Sharma in his seat, his second preference goes to the UAP candidate ahead of Allegra Spender, which is, you know, quite, quite fascinating. We know that One Nation and UAP preferences are going to be really critical in certain seats. And I know UAP is yet to declare how some of those will flow, despite sort of Craig Kelly indicating earlier that they would preference against the incumbents in all in all seats. So, look, I mean, you know, it's really difficult because there's no kind of central spot where you can see all the preference deals that sort of left to either the MP or the party to publish it on their website. But it's not like they have to lodge them with AEC or anything like that. So often there's some surprising things that you find out in the, you know, at once pre-poll opens. But obviously we know that there's been negotiations between the Liberal Party and the UAP. We know that there's a deal obviously being done between the Nats and One Nation in Queensland. So a lot of these things, particularly in those close seats, may end up being consequential. There's a lot of interest in what happens with Tasmania, with Jackie Lambie preferences, because they could be critical in deciding the outcome in seats like Braddon and Bass and Lions. So, you know, like there's a lot of debate as to where the preferences make a big difference, because obviously with the minor parties in particular, they don't always have the resources to man polling booths and hand out their how to vote tickets. You know, not everyone follows them. So I think at the last election, I think there's been a bit of work that suggested perhaps Bass was one of the few seats where UAP preferences made a real difference. But, you know, this is an election, unlike one we've had before, in that we don't really know how that post pandemic sort of anti-government sentiment is going to play out and how that support for the minor parties and independence is going to flow through with preferences. So in some seats where Palmer might get 10%, is he taking those votes away from Labour in some seats, the Liberals in other seats? How do they then get, you know, where do they land once they've been taken away from the major parties? So I think that's a really interesting one to watch in this election, particularly in those outer suburban areas, particularly Sydney and Melbourne. The next question I've got here is from James Bannon. Sarah, he asks, is there any evidence to suggest Labour is managing to combat the LNP position that Labour are poor economic managers or is that message too deeply entrenched? Well, I think we'll probably find out the answer to that on polling day. I mean, I think they are combating it by basically trying to keep the focus on the government's economic management and the experience of voters over some time with lack of wage growth and so on and saying, you know, the government can't lecture us about economic management when we have a debt approaching a trillion dollars, when we've had the largest deficits we've ever seen, when, you know, we've got inflation at 20 year highs, and, you know, so on and so on. So I think they're trying to combat it by keeping the focus very firmly on the government's record. I mean, it's, again, it's one of those sort of that cultural thing that people just instinctively think that the coalition are better economic managers. But some polls, and I think including a century has shown that that is not necessarily true anymore. So I don't know if it is as effective as it was, you know, perhaps 20 years ago, maybe at some deep psychological level, people believe that in the same way that Labour obviously their traditional strength is health. But yeah, look, I think I think the times are certainly different with the pandemic and with people's lived experience over the past decade under a coalition government so I think it probably makes it easier for them to combat it to a certain extent and also the fact that they haven't been, Labour hasn't been in government for a while so, you know, people, if they were unhappy with Labour governments in the past, you know, perhaps it's been a long enough time to forget about the, you know, the high interest rates under Paul Keating and different information and perhaps a different mindset about those sorts of issues. I don't know what do you think, Pete? Our numbers are clearly saying that that top level natural advantage in managing the economy is being challenged once you unpack it a little bit. Again, you know, the government's been trying to claim credit for a whole bunch of things outside their control, including low numbers of jobless given the borders have been closed and now they're about to then say it's not our fault if interest rates go up. So I think they're in all sorts, but it's actually no longer, I think, about economic management as much as it's about the government taking responsibility for what's going on and I think that's where Morrison is particularly exposed. The next question I've got is from Ronald Smith who says Clive Palmer claims he can keep interest rates below 3%. Isn't this a bald face lie as the RBA is independent of politics? Sarah, do you want to take that one? Yes, is the answer to that. And in fact, there's a good, there was a good story published on the Guardian which I encourage you to look up which sort of explains why there is absolutely no way that he can do that. But really interesting that he has chosen that issue to focus on because obviously the issue of housing and potential mortgage stress is a sleeper issue. And I think particularly if you look at some of those areas where mortgage stress is more of a risk again we're talking people living on the suburban fringes. If Clive Palmer is the only party really talking about that and that's obviously changed a bit since Labor's housing announcement on the weekend. But clearly that is going to get traction. People are worried about their mortgages. And I think there's, I don't know what you think about this Peter, I don't think we've spoken about it but I know that both major parties think that the research that Palmer has is really, really good in terms of like what type, what issues are really concerning to people. And which is why he's really campaigning very heavily on the pox on both your houses stuff and has singled out this issue of housing affordability and mortgage stress as one of a key concern to voters. So you can't do anything about it but he can certainly pick up some more voters by talking about it. Yeah, the intriguing thing for me on Palmer, I think he's got more resources than most of the other parties actually to do the research and the advertising. This time last election, it basically pivoted into a negative Bill Shorten message for the last three weeks of the campaign. All I'm seeing at the moment are full page ads at least in Sydney that are just bashing Morrison and then if they run interest rates as their big piece, that is not going to have the same effect as last time. So while there may be a preference flow that's not the relevance of UAP, it's where the wall of noise frames the final debate, and there is nothing in my numbers to suggest that if the wall of noise frames the debate around interest rates that just leads everything, everyone away from labor to create another life raft for Morrison I just can't see it. One thing I might just add to that is it might spell the need for truth in political advertising laws because indeed it is the RBA that sets interest rates not Clive Palmer. And, you know, perhaps some of that misleading advertising could be avoided if there were truth in political advertising laws. Keep dreaming, keep dreaming, keep dreaming. Currently completely legal to lie in a political ad, folks. The next question I've got is around the women's vote from Jan Pierce. She wants to know about the influence of the women's vote on the election in general and anything that we've got on marginal and teal seats in particular. I probably don't think it's a coincidence that a lot of the teal independent candidates, if not all of them are women, maybe Dave Pocock for the Senate in Canberra being a standout from the crowd there. But Pete, what do we know about the women's vote this election? By and large, I do know that women are more likely to be undecided voters still, and that the issues that are bothering them are cost of living primarily more so than men. So it feels like and I hate the cliche, household budget sort of politics. But remember, the vast majority of female voters are living non-political lives in suburbs and regional towns. And so what does politics look for them? Very different than what it looks like on an Australian Institute webinar. Sarah, I was really interested with, I thought, a really strong emphasis on women and women's issues from the Labor launch, whether it's aged care, primarily workers in aged care are women, the focus on childcare and then the pay equity announcement, making that an objective of fair work. I don't think that's an accident either. Was that the impression that you got that the Labor is overtly making a play for women voters this election? Oh, absolutely. And I think that also sort of ties into their pitch about wage growth. And obviously, those female dominated industries are some of the lowest paid in the country. And I think that issue is actually goes beyond even the targeted workers. I think that sort of most reasonable people in society acknowledge that a lot of those care workers are woefully underpaid. And the fact I think most people are pretty shocked and unhappy about the fact that the person down at Bunnings is getting paid more than the person who's helping your elderly relative in an aged care home. So I think that is certainly directed at female workers in those industries, but I think it also has border appeal and it sort of appeals to that sense of a fair go and ties into that broader conversation about wage growth and the need to lift wages in those industries. Yeah. Pete, a couple of people commenting in here about the Greens and what's happening with the Greens vote. I know a couple of national polls have had them quite high, for example, in Queensland. But would you just have a word of caution there because they're a smaller, minor party fluctuations in vote? You know, do people need to be wary of that? How are the Greens struggling? I saw that resolve poll with the Greens at 15 percent, which is kind of double what we've had most of the year. It feels they're still around 10, maybe as high as 12. Obviously, a lot of the focus has been drawn away from the Greens towards the teals because of their their scale and role in really strategic seats. I thought Adam Bant sort of saying it's great to have more people campaigning on these issues is exactly the right approach for the Greens to be taking on that. The numbers, if they're 12 and rising, their chances of picking up seats in the Senate going forward rather than backwards is strong. But I I'm just not sure if it's as high as 15. Yeah. Well, now in a few weeks, it'll be really clear. We've probably got time for a last couple of questions here. I've got one question here from Russell Johnston. Pete, this one might be for you about the influence of nearly enrolled young voters. Is there anything we know about young voters this election? We know there was a significant dump of that seemed like organised registrations of young voters. You know, the enrolled to vote drives just before the AEC rolls close and like hundreds of thousands, not not not small numbers. We know the younger you are, the more likely you are to vote progressive rather than conservative. So and the more young people, I think, enrolled and they tend to, you know, first elections tend to be not just all concentrated around unis and inner city, but living in the suburbs as well. I think it's I think that the two factors to watch is the voting patterns of young people and also the number of people that have moved from cities to the regions through the pandemic. And whether that has any impact on the voting profiles or some of the the rural seats, which have been traditionally just owned by the Nats. Sarah, it strikes me that for young people, cost of living is also going to be a huge issue alongside climate change. We know young young people need to be more concerned about that. Yeah, I was going to mention housing specifically. Both sides kind of trying to address it, but much more from the trying to buy your first house angle than anything around rental rights and things like that. But, you know, those would be huge issues for a lot of young people out there. Is there any chance that we might see an announcement on rental rights or anything before the election or are we firmly just in protecting people's wealth if they own a house, you reckon? Look, I think very much the latter, I think, and I think both part leaders have been asked about this and have given no indication that there's going to be anything special coming for renters. And even on the housing issue, both parties have policies for housing sort of accessibility, but nothing that will really address affordability. And we know that attempts to do the things that will actually improve housing affordability, like winding back some of the concessions for negative gearing and capital gains tax. Some of those housing tax reforms that would make a substantial difference to affordability have been more or less dismissed out of hand by both parties, at least for now. And you think at some point in the future, they are going to have to look at them. But we know after Labor attempted to present some tweaks to the Australian people on both of those issues, they were absolutely hammered and were, you know, were subsequently buried as labor policies. And I guess the other issue that would really do something about housing affordability is land supply and housing supply, which is primarily the responsibility of the states, but doesn't mean the federal government can't do anything. I mean, they can certainly put in place incentives to try and improve the supply side of the equation. So in terms of those issues for young people and housing affordability and rental stress, I think what we've seen so far is probably all we're going to get. That's it for today. Thanks all for listening to our recording of our live show, Pole Position, hosted by the Australia Institute. You can take a look at the slides discussed on the Essential Media website and find links in the Guardian Australia website if you want to watch it live. This episode was produced by Camilla Hannon. Merth will be back with you next week.