 This is The Guardian. Peter Van Oselen came out this week and said that it was a federal minister. All the federal ministers have come out and said that it wasn't them. And that there's been this, you know, obviously Scott Morrison said, oh, I'm not fast, I'm not worried about it. Couldn't care less, but like you can tell that obviously they care so much because they've put out this very coordinated sort of messaging. Peter, wouldn't you love to have seen the talking points this week? Dot point one, Scott Morrison is not a psycho. Not a psycho. Discuss. Happy New Year. Welcome to the show. You're with Catherine Murphy, political editor of Guardian Australia. And with me this week are... Paul Karp. Josh Butler. Daniel Hurst. Sarah Martin. And a regular listener will know the team's in the pod. Cave, that means we're about to do an Ask Us Anything episode. Now, if you're new to the show, our format is very simple. Clues in the title. You ask us the questions and we do our best to answer them. Josh is a new member of our team this year. So welcome, Josh. We're really thrilled to have you. Why don't you tell the listeners where you've been? Nice to raise them. Oh, thank you. Okay. I recently moved over from a website called The New Daily here in the press gallery. Now with the Guardian, I'm very excited to be here. Very happy to have you. Yes. Yeah, we are very pleased. Yes, anyway. Okay, let's kick off, Sarah. You are in the hot seat first. Now, this is a question, a sort of amalgamated question from Jordan Jansen at LMTM underscore on Twitter and Miss Mountebank. Sort of the question of the campaign, isn't it? Who do you see is the biggest threat to government held seats? Labor, the independence, the United Australia Party, or a combo of the three? And flowing from that of the independence that we know are in the field, who do you rate as having the best prospect of success? Well, a very good question, Jordan. I think the short answer is all of them are a threat. But it really depends on which seats you're looking at and which part of the country you're talking about. I think Labor certainly is obviously a threat to coalition held seats most certainly in Western Australia, where obviously UAP is not making any sort of, is not a moving part of note. And Clive Palmer is very much on the nose over there. I think Labor is obviously the bigger threat to the coalition in those marginal seats in South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania. Seats like Boothby, Bass, Braddon, Chisholm. Independence are also certainly a threat, particularly for those inner city seats, government held seats held predominantly by moderates. And the vibe I get speaking to government MPs is that Tim Wilson in Goldstein is probably the most at risk, where Zoe Daniels is campaigning quite strongly against him. Then there's those seats in the sort of wealthier parts of Sydney, North Sydney, held by Transimamun, where Kylia Tink, who's been back by Climate 200, is making a tilt. McKellar held by Jason Felinski, where Sophie Scamps is running, and Wentworth, where Allegra Spender is challenging Dave Sharma. And we know obviously Wentworth previously held by Karen Phelps. So look, I think for the independence, those are the seats really to watch. I think it'll come down really to the work ethic of some of those sitting MPs, how hard they worked that electorate, how many school ceremonies, how many openings of envelopes they have been to. Sausage, sizzles. Yeah, exactly. I think it'll be a real test of that. And then, of course, the size of the general swing against the government and how dissatisfied, well, how much the sort of anti Morrison swing damages them in those seats. But like someone like Dave Sharma, he's not a Tony Abbott type figure. So they're really interesting, but they're definitely the ones I'd say that the independents have the best shot at. In terms of UAP, it's a really interesting one. They are a threat, but I don't believe so much in terms of winning seats, but more just causing havoc with preference flows. And that could be problematic for both major parties. Murph had a story last week about whether or not Kelly, Craig Kelly, was open to preferencing certain government MPs dependent on whether or not they might support one of his private members bills. At the moment, UAP is very much the campaign is a pox on both your houses. You can't trust liberal labor or the Greens ever again. They're all awful. They're really going to suck up that protest vote. But I think one thing to watch is whether or not UAP sort of switches and turns the guns on labor as they did in 2019. And that was really damaging for Bill Shorten and Labor last time. So I know there's some nervousness in the labor camp that if it's a pox on both your houses, then they probably can withstand that. But if it does shift the guns onto labor, then that's obviously problematic for them. And I think UAP is definitely a threat in Queensland where the advertising is just unbelievable and they've become, I think most MPs, say UAP has now sort of taken over that One Nation protest vote. And also Western Sydney, I think, is an area to watch where in some of those close contests it's going to be very difficult to predict if those preferences, you know, if they lose, you know, five to 10 percent to UAP where those preferences land can be consequential. So all a threat is the short answer. And that was my very long winded answer. No, no, no, that was beautifully summarised. And as you can see, it is a key dynamic in the campaign. Now, Sarah, you ended up in your last observation with New South Wales. Let's stick with New South Wales just for a tick. This one is from at JJ. Hi, at JJ. How much are the results of the New South Wales by-elections, a litmus test for the federal election, do you think? So this is the Super Saturday. Yeah. I think it's the 25th of February or I think it's next weekend. I've lost. Next weekend I think. Yeah, I think it's the 12th of February. Anyway. What are we now? Exactly. What day is it actually? Exactly. No, no, no, that's all right. In the year of our Lord 2022. I think voters are generally pretty discerning between the state and federal elections. I mean, it will be interesting to see how strong a general sort of anti-government swing is. You know, we know that by-elections are notoriously tough for incoming governments and swings are usually bigger against the government in a by-election scenario because you can lodge a protest vote without, you know, changing the government. Yeah. I don't think these are really a litmus test for the feds per se. I thought you guys might disagree. But, you know, I thought it was interesting last week to see some of the state government ministers really amping up the anti-Cambra rhetoric. So they obviously know that Canberra is a problem and trying to stop the stink, you know, affecting their chances in those by-elections. It is quite interesting. I'll chuck in a quick observation if anyone's got any thoughts on Sarah. But just the other thing I reckon with those state by-elections, I hear both sides, people on both sides, whinging about the diversion of resources. Everybody wants to be getting their federal campaigns ready to roll. And these by-elections, a succession of people leaving basically by their own accord is diverting resources at a time. And diverting companies from it. Exactly. Exactly. But that's just to buy the bite. Now, we're going to go to Paul from Bill Dodd. Okay. I'm laughing. I'm laughing just because this question makes my brain hurt. But thank you for it, Bill. What's the chance of a half-Senate election and a postponed general election to give the Liberals time to swap out Skymote and deal with toxic pre-selections? That's a slight paraphrase of your question, Bill. And sticky with the Senate, there's quite a few questions actually in my mentions about, you know, all eyes on the House of Representatives in elections, obviously. But what about the Senate? Are there any, you know, potentially interesting outcomes there? So, sticking with the first, the half-Senate, go. Well, I actually joked about this last year. And the reason that the government might do it is to try and get more time to recover from COVID. Scott Morrison doesn't want the election to be a referendum on the pandemic response. So, you try and get on the other side of the Omicron wave and to frame the election around the economy, not around COVID. But I don't think it's going to happen. I think it would be an unmitigated disaster, both for the optics of clinging on to power for as long as possible, but also just war game through it in your head. If the coalition has a bad result at a half-Senate election, then, you know, Peter Dutton and maybe even Josh are armed with an argument to get rid of the leader. He can't win an election. He hasn't got the special source. It's not going to be 2019 over again. We've got to get rid of him. If the coalition does better than expected or even just a status quo result, well, you've wasted an election because if you'd had the full House election at the same time, you would be returned for another three years. So, really, there's no way to win doing that if you're Scott Morrison. So, I don't think it'll happen. In terms of the Senate results, I think Pauline Hanson will be returned in Queensland. I think given the, you know, although it's a minority opinion, there are enough people that hate lockdowns and are sceptical about vaccines that we could see United Australia Party re-entering the Senate in New South Wales and Victoria because there are parts of Sydney and Melbourne where they're, you know, getting double-digit votes. In Tasmania, Lambie is not up for election, but she could bring another senator with her to have a larger bloc. I think Queensland is going to be the most interesting contest because the expectation is that there will be two, possibly three on the progressive side of Labor and Greens, but there is an almighty shitfight for the last spot or two on the conservative side where James McGrath will get back to top of the coalition ticket. Matt Canavan second on that ticket and Pauline Hanson, who has a strong personal vote. But then there is a shitfight between Amanda Stoker, the Assistant Attorney General, the Liberal Democrat, Campbell Newman, the former Premier, Palmer. It's really going to be on for young and old. An absolute galaxy of stars. Does anyone, I just want to make it clear that I blame Nicky Savva. I know you were toying with this idea last year, but I blame Nicky Savva for this entire conversation if you're listening, Nick. Thanks a bunch for nothing. Anybody got any counter views on? The interesting part is, I think before that Nicky Savva column, Anthony Green, the ABCs election guru has been fielding questions. I've been watching this for months. People on Twitter are just so convinced that they're going to do a half-Senate election only. Every single day, Anthony Green, who is, he was very polite and very gentlemanly, Anthony Green. I think he's sort of, with all the most respect, I think he's slowly unhinging over how many questions he's getting over. He's like, he's like, responses to people are getting increasingly more sort of like, it's not happening, please relax. Well, we blame Paul too for that. It's a very nice conspiracy theory. He's like, oh my God, it's half-Senate violation. Oh, no. Exactly. Please not. The rules can allow it. Let's see. I don't disagree. I don't disagree with any of them. Thank you very much. Just saying anything can happen. Okay. All right. We're coming back to you, Josh. Now, this is a question from David Lamb. Do we assume the leak of texts between Gladys Berejiklian and a federal minister is an attempt to destabilise Morrison and a supplementary question. Why would a cabinet minister want to leak texts given the damage? Does somebody actually want the government to lose so they can overhaul the Liberal Party? Well, it's sort of like the million dollar question is. I mean, it's sort of, you know, essentially two differing views of why the texts have been released and why at this time. I guess there's only probably two people in the whole world that could sort of really answer that question, which is Peter Van Onselen, who's a journalist who aired them and the minister who allegedly leaked them. You sort of had sort of two camps, I guess, you know, this week, like straight away. I think a lot of people sort of went to, oh, you know, which person ticks all the boxes of being close to Gladys Berejiklian and maybe having a reason to not like Scott Morrison and, you know, likely being in East Wales maybe because they're texting Gladys on that sort of, you know, very personal basis. And I think a lot of people went straight to a particular Newther Wales minister who quickly about the next day and said that he wasn't part of it, never heard of it, not his thing. He wasn't the source. But that was the exact same person that I think a few federal sources that sort of quietly or not so quietly sort of pointed the finger at and hinted at as soon as it sort of came out. But again, then there's a flip side of, you know, it wasn't legitimately a federal minister who wants to sort of sound the alarm on Scott Morrison right before the election. And so, you know, the leadership ambition to all those sort of things in the source. Peter then also came out this week and said that it was a federal minister. All the federal ministers have come out and said that it wasn't them and that there's been this, you know, obviously Scott Morrison said, oh, I'm not fast. I'm not worried about it. Couldn't care less. But like you can tell that obviously they care so much because they put out these very coordinated sort of messaging. All the ministers who are standing up this week are saying, oh, it's been the most united cabinet we've ever seen. And oh, Scott Morrison's the best leader ever. And Stuart Robert coming out and saying, oh, I've known him more than, you know, I know him, I know him more than anyone apart from his wife and the whole world. Like it's. You could, wouldn't you love to have seen the talking points this week dot point one. Scott Morrison is not a psycho. Not a psycho. Discuss anyway. Okay. Does anyone else, anyone have thoughts on this? That's a great summary. Anyone got any thoughts? I was, I was just going to say that in all this, we shouldn't forget that when Scott Morrison became prime minister, it was a miracle in itself because he's from the, you know, the smallest faction in the party. So when people are looking for, for where to point the finger at, I mean, conservatives have an incentive to try and boost Dutton stocks. Morrison is prime minister because he won the votes of moderates in that ballot against Dutton, but was criticized for his, his treatment of Gladys and for trying to shift blame for the bushfires onto the state level and onto New South Wales particularly. So it's sort of like, you know, who shot Mr. Burns, the Simpsons episode where despite, despite it seeming to be a narrow field because of those criteria, it's actually much wider than you would think. And that's why it's so appalling to have the speculation play out for Morrison as it has. The other thing we don't know is when it was leaked. Yes. So, so, you know, wouldn't draw too big an assumption about. I saw, I saw a PVO tweet a little earlier. He said that he'd been aware of the texts for a while, but only authorized to use them recently. So again, and that's, I guess it's a question of like, we've got all these things over, you know, when, but these, these texts go back as far as the, the, you know, Hawaii troop and the bushfires and stuff. Like this is a long time that they've been hanging around and, you know, not to cast exposures on anyone's motivation or journalism or what, or what have you. But I mean, it's such a, such a intriguing little, little on-mote, isn't it? Yeah, it is. And yeah, yeah, exactly. Sarah, we're going to come back to you, love, from Kev Morton, sort of, I guess, the logical extension of having to have dot point number one in your talking points pack. Scott Morrison is not a psycho. What are the chances of a spill before the election? We can all weigh in on this when Sarah leads us. And a subset of this, I just want to mention quite a lot of the questioners today were asking about Greg Hunt, like would, is there any prospect that Morrison would replace him with another health minister prior to the election? But let's do the spill first. Look, it's a really good question. You can never rule out a spill in Canberra. And as we all know, the last two elections, the, you know, the, the MO has been replaced the leader and call the election and it's worked. So I mean, since then, they have changed the rules, but of course, rules can always be changed back, but the rules were changed. I think it's two thirds or 75 percent of the party room has to vote to change leader, but you know, half the party room can can vote to change the rule. So don't read too much into that. Look, there's sort of been a surprising lack of leadership chatter, I think, despite how appallingly the government is doing in the polls and Morrison's personal standing. I mean, it's it's now back to where it was when Turnbull was rolled. So you would think you would think that there'd be a bit more chatter than there is. I'm not 100 percent sure why that is other than the fact that perhaps there's no one agitating for it. You know, Dutton, who was obviously previously agitating, wouldn't have the support to take the leadership. And I guess Josh Frydenberg, who is the other sort of likely contender in such a scenario, isn't agitating as far as I can tell, you know, other than his normal propensity for self-promotion. Hi, I'm Josh Frydenberg. But the I do think I think at this stage of spill is unlikely, but it would be interesting if he was tapped or if he decided to leave of his own accord. I mean, you can't rule anything out in politics. It's a really crucial few weeks, I think, for the government. And last week was about trying to reset the narrative, obviously failed abysmally with the press club address. We've got parliament resuming next week. The next few weeks, I think, are really critical. And, you know, even by saying that there's no leadership chatter now, that could turn on a dime. So is this one of these things I'll pose my own question, is this one of these things where potentially like they all come back to Canberra and after the horror opinion polls and all this talk and, you know, the text and whatever, like people start getting together and have a little chat? Oh, definitely. And there will be a rallying of the troops, no doubt, and a disunity is death pep talk, as there always is at this stage of the cycle. I think a lot will depend on the feedback people are getting in there, you know, from their constituents. There's no doubt that everyone is angry. And I think the government's most MPs I've spoken to the view is that they don't think like they don't think this is really baked in yet, that it's still possible to turn it around and people are really pissed off because they've had a horrible summer and they just want to punch the next politician they see in the face. They don't care which one like they're all they're all awful. They hate the world. Whether or not, you know, the government can successfully do what Morrison tried to do last week, which is say, oh, this is you know, this is not about what's happened. This is about what's to come. You know, that's going to be the key test, really, and what the election will ultimately turn on, I reckon. I thought it was interesting at the press club that Morrison was asked why he was the best person to lead the coalition. And his answer was a comparison between himself and Anthony Albanese inviting the scare campaigns of you know, you can't elect a Labour government. It totally missed the point of the question, which is, you know, given how well you performed over this term, like are you not worried about someone else trying to lead the coalition and rather than defend his own personal qualities or how he'd performed over the term. Let me count the ways I'm better than Peter Dutton. Instead of doing that, he the argument was just, well, you know, I managed to do it last time by having a very stark contrast with Labor and I'm just going to I'm just going to play the hits. I'm just going to do that again. Quickly anybody got any thoughts about whether Greg Hunt could be replaced before the election? I mean, personally, I'd be surprised. But anyone got a different view to that? I think that's it today when I was a Greg Hunt's press conference. Like I think obviously ministers and people resign for elections all the time. It's not like it's this extraordinary thing. But we are in such an extraordinary circumstance. I think that you kind of really want someone, I think with their hand on the rudder of the pandemic response. And you look at who's the other minister in the sort of health space is Richard Colbeck. I mean, Greg Hunt is the aged care minister now as well. If he sort of takes off and there's no more senior one, does that leave Richard Colbeck in charge of sort of not the health portfolio, of course, but like the whole thing. I mean, I think I think it wouldn't be a bad idea to kind of say he's the guy or the person who's taking over from Greg Hunt and give him a bit of time to sort of settle into the role. I think that'd be a hard one to hit the ground running on if you're first day back and you're the new health minister. Yeah. Yeah. Hi, welcome to the pandemic. Do you mind? Yes. Okay. So tracking back because I broke up David Lamb's question there just for sense, but we're just going to come back to another element of David Lamb's question. This is about texts. He asks just of this incident, which has ended up dominating the way, should journalists be willing to play such an active part in internal party machinations? He means like, obviously, should we be standing up the press club saying, Shazam, I have these text messages when you know people have motives and usually if you are the recipient of the leaked texts, you know exactly what the motive is. So what do you reckon? What do we think? Josh, why don't you kick off? It is a tough one and I mean, yeah, there are so often times when you get a tip or a little call or whatever it is and in this job that you know that it's based on something that's more than just the goodness of someone's heart or they're being a good pal or blowing the whistle. I think a lot of this sort of stuff that you get dropped or leaked or whatever has some sort of political motivation to it. And that sort of comes down to your own high and mighty journalistic integrity and that sort of stuff. I don't know, I read some stories this morning that maybe these texts have been around for a little while, maybe been shopped around a little bit previously and I don't know anything more than what I've read. But I think it would be a, this is like, I think a really explosive, extraordinary sort of set of texts. I think it will be hard to sort of turn it down. It's a pretty juicy story. But at the same time, we are what, three months from an election. If this was a leak that was designed to, I don't know, start some leadership talk or destabilise the government before an election. I mean, it's sort of done the job. Yeah, I'm not sure it's a really tricky one. I think everyone, every political actor has motives and self-interest. You can't really compensate for that by suppressing what is very interesting and relevant information for voters to know how bad the PM's relationship with the former New South Wales Premier is. I think you should probably just hit publish and then shut up about it, though you shouldn't go on radio playing, you know, hotter, colder games about who it is. Yes. And also, you know, one thing that was missing from the story was context, the original story. So it would be helpful to have had, you know, if you're going to proceed with a story like that, it would be helpful to proceed with a bit more context about exactly when particular texts happen. We know one of them or one part of it was around the bushfires. We don't know when all the others are necessarily a bit more context about exactly what, you know, what, you know, Cladispergic Lin was responding to when making those particular comments like I just feel that there's a bit of context lacking. So, you know, you've always got a way of motivations of sources. Absolutely. And if you're going to proceed with the story like that, ideally, there'd be more context around it so that people can weigh up the significance. Sarah. I agree. I think completely devoid of context as it is, it makes it very difficult to judge. I think the other thing, you know, we're all aware that politicians call other politicians awful things all the time. And you know, you can sort of imagine the number of MPs and ministers scrolling through their text messages once that story broke, working out, you know, whether it was their terrible thing that they said on a particular day. Was it me? But the other thing I think context is super important, but also emphasis. I mean, I don't know if Peter Van Onselen really emphasised the motive enough in reporting that story and perhaps, you know, maybe that was for his source protection. That's obviously a judgment that he made. But I think, you know, perhaps as a journalist, you have a responsibility to emphasise the motive of the leak, not just the content matter that was leaked. No, I think we covered that well. Daniel, we're coming to you. So this question is from Olivia White. And again, it's sort of like a 64 million dollar question, isn't it? Can we trust opinion polls this time around and are some polls more reliable than others? And also from Tennant Reed, have we, Tennant, to be clear, works in an industry association and the we, I think, refers to us and people orbiting around the political class. Have we all overcompensated for the polling misses and interpretive excesses of the 2019 election? Both really good questions, Daniel. I think, you know, polls are not predictive. They're a point in time measure. It's interesting to look at how, you know, when there's a significant change over time in what in the same poll shows against the previous version of that same poll. But they're not predictive. They're a point in time thing. And I do think there's a bit of a collective sort of media caution this time around about how to interpret them and how to sort of avoid being seen to be, you know, suggesting a particular outcome is a fait accompli. I'm not going to say which poll is better than which poll, but I do think there's a bit of caution this time around. And you know, you got to keep in mind things like margins of error and so on. And bear in mind that it's a point in time measure. Just quickly, certainly, I think, in Josh wasn't with us at this at this time, but in the 2019 election, I think one of the regrets that we had Sarah was and and all of us, right, we all went out doing seat profiles. We had a we had a pretty clear sense, I think, when we came back from those assignments that that that the picture being painted by the opinion polls was not the reality on the ground. And and we sort of got into pseudoscience mode and then second guessed our own reporting and our own instincts. And it turned out we were right and the polls were wrong. So I think it's yeah, I think that lesson has settled on all of us. I think one really interesting thing just to point out on the polling is, and I had a look at the April 2019 figure just before this, but so April 2019, like a month before that election, there was an 11% other vote and a 4% undecided and excluded. So not not counted. At the moment, it's 11% others and 7% uncommitted and excluded. So combined, that's a big chunk of the vote. And a lot of those people are the disengaged, you know, low political awareness. And a lot of those people decide seats. So I think we just have to be always aware of that chunk of people that don't know, don't care are going to make up their mind in the queue on election day. And you know, that that that that's something that I think has become more apparent and has made opinion polls less reliable than they used to be. Yeah, well, there's a whole conflict. We could do a whole port on this in terms of the difficulties of getting representative samples now. But that point of uncertainty, that's something that we in reporting the Guardian Essential poll we've tried to bring to the fore this element of uncertainty in any in any fortnightly results. So, OK, so we're back to Paul from Michelle. You reported on this story this week on the big money in politics. Who's donating and what kickbacks do they get? Well, there are really two types of donors. One is a partisan who is giving a donation because they're trying to tip the scales for one side of politics or the other. So you get unions who pay affiliation fees to labor. You get big corporates like Pratt Holdings. Anthony Pratt's company was the biggest donor this time with one point three million to the Liberals. And you know, Merriton gave a big chunk of cash to the Liberals, particularly in New South Wales as well. So that's one type. The other type is bed each ways. You know, not want to be in suite with both major parties. So give money to both of them. And there was something like a million dollars from fossil fuel companies this time around. And a little bit more to the conservative side, but they gave money to both sides of politics in terms of what companies and individuals get for that. It's mainly access to know that you'll be sitting at the business forum with a minister or get you get your calls returned, that sort of thing. It's not really a straight quid pro quo for policy like like lots of people, you know, fear might be the case. And the thing to remember is that, you know, cash might help grace the wheels of a campaign, but parties always have a much bigger incentive, which is the electoral imperative of needing to win votes. And if you look at something like fossil fuels, Labor's policy, they've softened their position on, you know, public subsidies for fossil fuel projects, not because these companies give them money, but because they got spanked on this issue at the 2019 election, that the both ways on Adani and just the impression that they were anti, you know, extractive industry jobs really hurt them in Queensland. And that is going to have a far, far bigger effect on their policy at this election than who's giving however much money. Nicely summarised, Daniel. We've got a batch of foreign and defence questions that have come for Daniel who of course deals with foreign and defence in our office. I just want to thank the audience for these. They were really good. It was really hard to sift them out. So we're going to do three and move it along a bit. Okay. From George Hannah, what will the government do to restart a dialogue with China? From Robert Cox, given there seems to be a trend of short term and seemingly ad hoc decisions about defence spending will either side commit to a broad based review of procurement needs, I would say, editorially, what a good idea. From Tim Fitzsimons or Simmons, I think it is, Tim, we hear next to nothing these days about Australia's relationship with Indonesia. What's the state of the relationship? So in turn, Daniel, what are your thoughts? Sure. We'll go through them as quickly as possible. So on China, I don't see any prospect of the Australian government making any concerted push before the election, months away from election. Morrison is warming up to try to accuse Labour of being soft on China. That doesn't stack up. It doesn't stack up at all. But in that context, there's no prospect that there'll be some sort of gesture made by the Australian government to try to resume talks. Last week, the new Chinese ambassador arrived in Australia with some positive sounding messages, just words, but messages about wanting to get the relationship back on the right track. So long as there's mutual respect, we know that phrase mutual respect means that the Australian government shouldn't be criticising China over Taiwan, Hong Kong and other issues like that. So there's a view in the Australian government that the problems in the relationship are structural. It's not just a matter of words. Peter Dutton, within hours of the ambassador arriving, said he'll continue speaking out about China's belligerent approach. So they didn't take up that offer of trying to find a new way through with the new ambassador. So status quo for the time being. On defence spending, look, interestingly, two weeks before AUKUS was announced and upended everything, the Labour Party actually committed to, if they were elected, launch a defence force posture review that would be looking at things like bases, exercises, the overall posture of the defence force, new challenges like cyber attacks and so on. Then AUKUS came along. I'm sure that's still Labour's pledge to do that force posture review. But in terms of the big sort of defence spending, the trajectory is locked in. Labour doesn't want to be able to be accused of being weak on national security. So they'll be in lockstep with the government on increasing defence spending. They'll have to look at those projects as well. But big defence procurements are locked in over long periods of time. We saw the fallout from scrapping the French submarine contract. That's what happens when you chop and change. So I think the main settings are locked in. On Indonesia, they're actually hosting the G20 this year. So we hopefully will hear a bit more in Australia discourse. We did have a new defence, sorry, we did have a new trade deal that came into force between Australia and Indonesia in 2020. There are things happening early September. Peter Dutton and Maryse Payne went to Jakarta. They talked about increasing defence cooperation, having more joint exercises, Indonesian troops training in Australia alongside Australian troops. That again was just before AUKUS. There was fallout over the deal, the fact that Australia didn't tell Indonesia in time or ahead of it. Indonesia and Malaysia have been the ones who have been saying, well, we're worried about an arms race, nuclear nonproliferation issues. So Maryse Payne had to go back in November to reassure them. Those issues are still playing out. But interestingly, there's a bit of pragmatism seeping in in Jakarta. The defence ministry, the defence minister said in November that he understands and respects Australia's decision. So, you know, there was a bit of concern about AUKUS when it was announced. The government, the Australian government had to mop that up. We'll see what happens this year. But you know, it's definitely an important relationship. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Last one, all in, everybody. And I'll just put this in because I could hear at Top Cat's mood, I suppose, in pounding the keyboard for this particular question. Are Australian voters really so comprehensively shallow that they'll succumb to a $16 billion barrel of slush and look past Morrison's catastrophic ineptitude discuss? So it depends what's in the barrel of slush, doesn't it? Like, I make it a no. If it's just, I don't know, money for boring stuff, maybe not. But if it's like, seriously, like if it's something like they're going to extend, you know, the limato and give tax cuts for everyone, like five minutes for the election, like maybe that is something that will swing a lot of votes, it probably will. If it's something that's not quite as splashy, maybe it won't. Like it's, you know, Labor might make all these billions of dollars of announcements before the election. It's not as though, you know, Labor's on the one hand with their pockets turned out and the government's got all this cash. Like they're both going to make these big time announcements. And you know, I would, I know Albany's been getting a lot of questions in the last few weeks of like, oh, where's your agenda? What are you going to spend? Like, what are you doing? I don't know. He's had to sort of come out and defend it a lot and like, you know, list off like a laundry list of all their policies. And so we've done childcare, we've done this climate thing, no one thought I could do, done this and that and da, da, da. And I think, you know, they're all a lot of them are strong policies and they've gotten some praise in the press and that sort of thing. But I sort of do wonder people get to the polls on election day and sort of try to think of what Labor's policies are. And like, I don't know if a lot of them so far have been big grabby ones, like if they're things that are going to turn a liberal voter to a Labor voter or a swing voter to a Labor voter or something like that. Like I think there's probably some big splashy promises Labor are going to have to roll out as well at some point. So depends what's in the slash barrel, I guess. I thought it was interesting that Labor MP Andrew Lee, who's an economist, had an academic paper that actually found that, you know, despite Labor going troppo over the car park rorts and the sports rorts, actually found that these made no impact in how people voted by sort of running a regression on the seats that got all the cash and the general swing in the election. And he found it didn't swing anything. I almost got the sense like the coalition promised all that money last time because they needed something to talk about. Labor had even bigger spending promises about, you know, cancer out of pocket costs and hospitals and the childcare workforce. So in order to just have something to talk about, they needed to be doling out what were smaller amounts of money on the coalition side. But I think the thrust of the question is right, that Morrison has more of a record this time. So it's more likely that more people are going to be voting on do we think he's competent? How do we think he has performed in the last three years rather than a sort of calculus about what is my seat getting? Agree that this time it'll be more focused on Morrison's personal appeal or otherwise he's lost a lot of skin in the last few months or years, but I don't know, I've lost sense of time. How long has it been? Lost sense of time. Integrity issues are really important and, you know, obviously the government has stonewalled on a proper federal ICAC and other things like that. So you know, hopefully the big cash spending pledges will also be accompanied by focus on what is being offered on integrity. Well said, Sarah. Yeah, look, I agree with everything that's being said. I mean, we know some of the pork, some of the 16 billion that was in May, we know some of what that money is now, like the reef announcement, the manufacturing thing in the press club speech, some of the medical supplies, I think has also come out of that 16 billion. I think Josh is right, like there will be some tax something in the budget. You know, I think those things, you know, Barnaby Joyce always, when he's asked about this, always talks about, you know, voters love pork, you know, like it's something for the incumbent MP to campaign on and, you know, you often see their campaign flyers, which will promote, you know, the upgrade to the library, the car park, the, you know, the local school, whatever. So they, you know, it can be important spending for particularly, and it is an advantage for the incumbent MP. And we know that in the analysis of some of the grant funding, it does overwhelmingly benefit the incumbent. So that's not necessarily a negative for in voters minds. So yeah, definitely one to watch. But I think this time the dynamic is different with, you know, the government having copped a lot of heat about how those grants have been allocated. Well, that's the end of the questions for this episode. As I said, you know, we're very, very grateful for how seriously you take these episodes. And we try to meet your seriousness with a serious conversation. So I hope you've enjoyed it. I hope you've noticed that I have the best team in the world. Just say that again, I really do. I also have the best team in the world on this podcast. Welcome back from parental leave, Mars Martagnone, who's the EP of the show. I also have the best audience on this podcast. Thank you to all of you for getting in touch for saying, when is the pod coming back? Well, the pod is back and the pod is will be back in its normal weekly cycle for a really important year in Australian politics. Federal election years are always incredibly important years. We'll be working really hard in our bureau to bring you the news as it happens, preferably before it happens to keep you up to date with live coverage, to do analysis, to ask the right questions, to fact check and have our usual mission, which is tell the truth and shift the dial. So thank you for sticking with us. We will be back next week. Good God, it just fell into my head. Parliament is back next week. So we'll be back with you then. Until then, take care.