 Hello everyone and oh my goodness we're already going off in the pod cave here. It's Catherine Murphy here on Politics Live and of course today given the news of the week is... J D P The Economy Exactly. I'm joined by my two favourite numbers persons. Yes? Yeah it's a big field of numbers persons. The boys are back in town. The boys are back. Oh boys. Yes anyway sorry no singing. Yes anyway stick to the program. I am joined this week by Greg Jericho. Hello. And by Shane Wright who used to be our neighbour. Long time pod listeners of the pod will know used to be our neighbour at the West Australian but now is a very important economics person at... The SMH and the age. It's taken me nine months since I've left for you to get me back. I know. And it's not a long trip down to the other end of the gallery. It is busy. You've got to pack a lunch. You've got to pack a lunch. Hot lunch. Hot lunch. Anyway anyway we were just to bring you guys listeners up to speed. We were concerned we were venting our best analogies before we entered the pod cave and hit record so we're just waiting on into this conversation as you can see in highly chaotic fashion but given as we're recording today it's it's Wednesday so the GDP numbers have just landed out of the out of the hot presses of oh my god I'm losing it. Bell Conin. Thank you. Let's start there. So GDP, Greg Jericho picks up the story. GDP growth was terrible. I think that... Hold back. Hold back. I realise I am being guilty of talking down the economy but I'm talking down things that have happened in the past perhaps. God you've gone all Morrissey already. I have too. I'll break out a bit of a Smith soon. As long as no one says meat is murder we're fine. In trend terms which is always the one I like using because a bit less erratic than the season adjustment. In trend terms the economy in the past year grew slower than it did even during the GFC. It's the worst since March 2001. If you look at the average of growth over the 2018-19 financial year again it's as bad as since 2000-2001. Even better than during 2008-2009 during the depths of the GFC. GDP per capita is now lower than it was a year ago. When I was writing my article on it I pretty much needed a macro for the line worst figures since the GFC or worst figures since the 1990s recession. There really are no bright spots. The treasurer, God bless him, sought to polish this. Don't go there. Don't go there. He polished these figures. Pigeon balls. In a sense that they weren't as bad as could be as expected in almost a sense of all they could have gone backwards which I think would have been for me it would have been a surprise if they'd gone backwards. But really there wasn't much joy there especially when you look at the fact that the main reason we stayed above water was government spending and the fact that we stopped importing a lot of stuff because we don't have any money. You're all down. You're all down. Lift us up. Shame right. Let's soar with the eagle eye. Shame right takes up the story. Takes up the story. Yes the import side was down but exports were up. We've missed the fact that there's a hell of a, there's shiploads of red dirt and gas making its way out of the country and that's an absolute positive. And there was a small lift in the household in consumption. You'll have to concede Greg there's a little bit there but not a great deal. Well this is interesting isn't it? I don't want to cut you off because we've only. Because you have. No, no, well I don't actually but there, well and that's true I did. I might just leave right now. It's actually intolerable. No, it just dropped into my head Chaps that the Treasurer was placing, we'll probably get there in a minute anyway but placing much emphasis on this is the quarter before the tax cuts guys in terms of the consumption story. Yeah and so it added a little bit but as Mr Jericho was absolutely right GDP per capita minus 0.2 for the quarter after the year. The last time that happened was in 08-09 and in 08-09 as Greg will remember because Murph is far too young to realise, remember these things. I think we're all the same age. I'm being polite. There was a huge number of Australians who returned from around the globe because they couldn't get work and so the actual peak in population growth occurred during the GFC because we do, you're not allowed to stop Australians coming back. All these Australians came back so it gave us a surge in population but it also was one of the factors behind negative GDP per capita or as I explained to a non-nerd today it's like the big GDP pie from which we all eat. We actually have to share a bit more with our neighbours so we don't get quite as many calories as we normally do from this GDP pie. So that's the element and I want to get to that exact point that you were bringing up Murph about going forward. So yesterday we had retail trade for July. Now, every time I go in the shop, you're not shopping. You're not spending. It's your fault. No one is. No one is and shops are closing. That's right. So we know Josh Frydenberg got up in the house on July 22 and said we've had $3 billion in refunds go out to people hitting bank accounts by that date. Car sales through July fell by 0.1%. Now you could say, right, that might be just people were holding back. Right. You could argue that point. Today we get new car sales, which I think are really good indicator of how the economy was going. They fell 10% year on year. Lowest since August 2010. Now there are about a million extra drivers on the roads since that point and I don't know what they're driving. Maybe they're all taking public transport, but that wasn't the GDP figures either. So that is and and Frydenberg actually mentioned car sales today because they were one of the biggest detractors. It was very stark. It was very stark because there's such a good indicator because after your house, your new set of wheels, probably the next biggest purchase that most people have to make. Now, so the end of August, we've actually had car sales fall and that's with tax cuts flowing and with two interest rate cuts. Now the federal, the federal chamber of automotive industry say some of it may be during due to the tightening of lending standards around car loans. That may be true, which then says, hold on, house loans tightening. It's going to be a tightening of house loan standards in the next couple of months. We're waiting for that to start hitting. Hasn't that already happened? There's a bit more tightening to come. And so that's there's a bit of concern amongst the banks that, oh, hold on. This has yet to hit and whether the lift that we've seen in the house prices in Sydney and Melbourne in particular might be, they'll come up against this hard door somewhere along the line, probably around November. So you can see the murkiness and then the biggest murk is the Trump and then slightly lower is the Boris who are both doing their best to try and cruel the global economy. Well, and presumably that makes, was it, was it you in the press conference that asked about confidence? I think it was, wasn't it? I mean, it's all about confidence. Doesn't that? Well, well, I mean, in this sphere, it sort of is really. So looking at the world and people might sort of think, well, you get into the detail of the national counts, household saving ratio fell to its lowest point since 2007. At the same time as consumer spending overall is actually really soggy. So what the hell? They're not putting the money under the mattress. They're biting into their savings, but not going on a tear down at the local JB. So what are we doing paying off debt or something? Or something. That's right. All the costs of certain things have gone up and that's eating into. Yeah. Or maybe people just burning their cash and just bonfires. The difference between retail figures and consumption are the things like insurance and non-things that you buy. Yeah, bills basically, you guess. And don't get me started on insurance bills. Insurance costs are going. Okay. Well, thank you anyway for cheering us up after my negativity. You just, you know, really. Well, no, it's good. Merky and horror. I didn't go horror. Come on. I'm adding in my favorite word, soggy. Soggy. I love it. It's definitely soggy. We can square this light and darkness circle by sort of thinking through a couple of things. Now, the treasurer was obviously keen to say, oh, look, figures are great. They could have been worse. Right. Today, that was a fairly profound message in the messaging or today. You only lost an arm. You didn't lose both. Exactly. Could have had no arms. Can you bless us? I've got one perfectly good arm. But there was some talk around about this quarter potentially being softer than it was. In a negative quarter, the kind of analysis is pinging around in the markets and elsewhere among people who talk about the economy that, you know, are we heading for a recession? Are we not heading for a recession? Now, obviously, these figures were not negative. And so we're not even close to a recession. We need two negative quarters in order to make that benchmark. And who wants a recession in this room? No one. No one in this room. No one in this room. Outside the room, there may be. No, I mean, attract them down. You actually want a recession. No one wants a recession, do they? I'm sure there's some fiscal hedge shirt types out there. You get the odd idiot who says, oh, we need a recession to sort this generation out. Oh, well, there was Paul Keating. They read the AFR. There was Paul Keating. But anyway, moving on from that. So what do we think? Are we just going to do straight light and darkness here or are we going to mix it up a bit? What do we think about the risks of recession? Come on, Dark. Dark cloud. Well, I'll stay gloomy. I mean, exports and government spending were the saviors and also the drop in imports. Take those away and you basically got the private domestic economy and that went backwards. Now certainly, we're taking out bits of the economy and you're saying, oh, let's not count that and let's just count this. And that's true. You do have to look at the whole economy. But when that domestic private sector economy is going backwards, that's generally associated with bad times. In the past, it has more often been associated with actual recessions, but that was because we weren't exporting as much stuff as we are now. And so we actually are able to... Our economy has changed over the past 10 to 20 years. It has become more reliant on exports than it was in the past. But I kept looking for things to sort of cling to, say, well, there's some nice signs. The treasurer talked about, oh, well, importantly, living standards have increased. Well, they've only increased if you use the measure that he used, which was net national income per capita. And the wonderful thing about that figure is it includes all the profits that companies get from digging up stuff and sending it overseas, which as we know, has not really flowed through into household wages. So if you just look at household disposable income, in real terms, it fell. And it's basically been flat for... We're getting on a decade now. We're at the level now in real terms, household income per capita is where it was at the end of 2010. So it's like... Well, but there's two options, isn't there, though? And Shane Wright takes up the story. There are two options. So are we sort of... And I think we have discussed this in this quorum before about whether we are in this sort of permanent low growth. If we're kind of trapped in this permanent, well, permanent, you know what I mean, an entrenched low growth... Secular stagnation is what Larry Summers would say. Thank you. Exactly. No, good on Larry Summers. Secular stagnation. So we might just sort of bump along not very fulfillingly, or we might... The nose... Nose dive. Well, look, I think the argument that a combination of 14 billion worth of tax cuts and two, if not more, interest rate cuts, unless people are out there at the Burning Man Festival burning... I don't even know if you can burn Australian polymer notes. No, I know. I'm not sure. I was wondering. Melt them. Somewhere along the line, that money has to filter back into the economy somewhere. So that should give some floor to the consumers. If you see house prices, I don't want house prices going through the roof. Like the stuff that we saw this week in Sydney, Melbourne was just stupid for one month. But if you can, rather than falling through the floor and just stabilize, that will also give... We come back to the confidence vary and say, right, that... Okay. And the other good point... And the government is not wrong. The jobs growth we've had over the last 12, 18, 24 months has been really strong. So people, I always maintain the world is a better place if our person has a job. Always. Always. So they're the strong underpinnings of it. Getting back into the darkness, we know that the lift that we got from the exports won't last because we know that that's... One, it's facing tropical hurricane Trump and also... Tropic thunder. Tropic thunder and also prices have come off. So that won't give the boost, but on the other side, the inventories, which fell through the floor, won't be the same as well. So you look at the next quarter, 0.4, 0.5 isn't too bad. It's not shooting out the lights, but it's better than going backwards. And as long as you see a bit of a shift towards the consumer, and there are reasons to believe, that... It's starting to sound like Springsteen, I tell you. They'll see some money getting back into it, whether that's possible. And we even heard today that Skomo has written off to the Premier saying, let's talk about infrastructure to... Let's do some more chats. Yeah. To go down that path. Like you can see that there are elements that'll keep the economy growing. And so they will do whatever they think to make sure the economy doesn't contract. So that's what I'm not in the... I'm not going to use that R word because I think it's just too big a leap for the overall economy, especially with what's going on in our export side of things. From where we are now. You don't see recessions until you start seeing unemployment rising. And it's not... I mean, it's risen a little bit, but not really. Off a really high participation rate. So we're certainly in this new normal of... We're probably not going to have recessions, but the old boom times... It's the meh. The meh. It is. The meh economy. Trademark. Well done. I mean, the one thing that is really underpinning it all that I think actually is the long-term problem that certainly is not going to be solved by a tax cut is the fact that productivity is really tanking. And that really should be the sort of item number one on the agenda for the government, really. So Freidenberg has identified... To his credit, he's identified it. The only issue is what's the solution? And his solution was, right, go... Business go spend some money. And that's about... Yeah. You go through the rest of it. These guys actually need to do some heavy lifting rather than just hold... Bring them a Kumbaya meeting of premiers to say, how are we going to lift productivity? We get into structural... And it is a damn hard thing as well. It is really tough. Well, it's particularly, and I don't say this as gratuitously as perhaps it sounds, but it is particularly difficult for a government that sought no mandate from people at the recent election to do anything at all, apart from not be Labour. So look, and as time progresses, that will wear off, obviously. And... That's a brave call. So that particular... Well, it'll... No, it'll reassert itself in different form. Anyway, that's fine. But it is difficult for them. I think just interestingly with productivity, it's almost like they're creeping back to never a more exciting time and Malcolm Turnbull almost creeping back a cycle gently. They haven't got back to the Abbott hockey, let's have a white paper on tax, let's have a white paper on the Federation, which you know that there are savings and efficiencies that can be made. We get to... One thing that really ticked me was Frydenberg's speech the other day where he referenced the Productivity Commission's shifting the dial report, which if you want a blueprint for productivity reform, that's where you'd go for, SCOMO commissioned it, he got it two years ago. It's been there, like the dust that Josh must have to clear off, it's actually to see the title must have been... Astounding. Astounding. He referenced the report, said, look, yeah, PC did a report, but not an... And he was referencing health and he said, oh, look, we're going to spend more on health. That's not what the PC was talking about. Right, put the patient at the center of care, right, devolve power out to the local areas, set up robotic systems to give out medicines, like let's go around the pharmacy guild, you know how well that'd go off. Let's have a go at the doctors who... What's one of the best stats I've seen in ages is that the cost of people sitting in doctor's surgery is about a billion dollars a year. Now there is better time, more you can spend your time on than reading six year old copies of Better Homes and Garden. Or Read His Digest. Or Read His Digest. That you know, Murph, you're looking at me and saying, oh my God, how many interest groups would you tick off going to? No, exactly, quite, quite. But that's why it's difficult and that's why they haven't got all that. And generally when the government talks productivity, they automatically go to IR and the reality is the productivity commission was kind of a bit blur on all of that sort of, yeah, you know. And the reality is how much more flexible can we really get and in terms of actual having real impacts, what we're going to get... Essentially it always leads to lower wage growth or at least wage growth linked to productivity. Well, we've seen the experiment around penalty rates and there's no evidence. None. Zip. Yeah, zip zero. Yeah, zip. Time is racing, chaps. Let's just do this as the last thought for both of you. So it looks to me because I watch this debate at a distance back from the two of you in terms of the intricacies of it, right? I just look at it as a sort of rolling political story. It looks to me that it's starting to dawn on the government that they are governing in very complex times. And again, it sounds a bit fatuous, right? How could they have escaped their attention given they've been in government for six years? But I can sort of plot a trajectory from post-election ebullience. Everything is tremendous. It'll be just great. It's fine. It's fabulous. It's terrific to today. Whereas you say, Shane, the sort of locution from the treasurer was, you know, it's like, well, you didn't lose both arms, you know. Sheer up, bucko. It's fine. It's a bit of a diffuse question, but I'm interested in your views about it. Do you think they've sort of woken up understanding now that this coming term is perhaps going to be a bit more complex than they thought it was going to be? I think one of the interesting things about today was just how different it would have been had it been a Labor treasurer showing these figures. And there would have been a real sense of, right, the past is past and we're getting going and there's new things coming. All those taxes, for example. Yeah. But I mean, this government, it's dealing with that problem of them trying to say, oh, it's no surprise to us. We saw this coming. It's like, wait, you saw these bad figures coming? No, not a surprise to you. And it's a case of them also wanting to balance with the, oh, no, we're being calm and we've got the plan. We've got it all under control. We know what we're doing. And I think you're right in that sense. After the election, they really tried to spin the thing of, oh, now that the fear of negative gearing and the dividends are all gone, everyone will be happy and joyful. And it's like, no, the problems are actually deeper and structural. And I think you're right. I think that is, well, if it's not dawning on them, it damn well should. Because you're right, Shane, is saying that the tax cuts and the interest rate cuts are going to have an impact card. If they don't, then we're really in trouble. Because if you can't actually do stimulus and it doesn't stimulate, then we're really in the crapper. But again, that is not a long-term underlying improvement. You're then hoping that that spurs on something which there's too many bad things overseas that could knock us back. So yeah, if they haven't woken up, they better quickly. Because it is a troubling period. Well, I'm going to take the contrarian view. I don't think I've got to that point. You don't think they have? No. Because they've got a plan. This is the plan. We're not varying from the plan. We can't concede that the plan was wrong because we took the plan to the motors. And they endorsed us as opposed to ignoring the catastrophe that was going to be labor with all its taxes and all the rest. Talking down the economy. Talking down the economy. I still think they still believe, goodness, they're sounding like a musical here, they still believe where they are is the right space. Eventually, things will move their way. Trump, Boris are outside their remit and outside their control. I'm not saying it's right, but I think they're still convinced we have a plan. We're going to stick with it. The only problem is, it actually, it's starting to remind me a little bit of Greg Hunt's policy came up with on how to deal with greenhouse. Don't call that a policy show. Sorry. On the back of a napkin back in 2009 or over the summer of 2010. And they believed that that was, well, we've got a plan. We're going to stick with it. Even though as it's played out over the next decade, it was utter rubbish. So they've got a plan. Let's stick with it. And by God, it's going to be tough for us to get around that. And because they whipped together these new tax cuts in the run up to the April budget, that's our plan, which is hold on, the next element of the plan is 22-23. It's a long way off. Well, that's a hell of a gamble and a hell of a way to end because we've ended on a moment of suspense, which is perfect. Will it work? Tune back in 2023. This is the Hitchcock approach to economics. We will certainly be back before 2023 with this wonderful group to flesh these issues out some more as the data continues. Thank you as always for listening. We really do appreciate it. Thank you to Miles Martagnone and also to Hannah Isard for production this week. Parliament resumes next week. Yay. You said no one ever. We will be back, obviously, next week with more of The Escapades.