 We are entering a very challenging economic period. As we move past March and insolvency laws, the freeze changes and a lot of the, you know, the payments get wound back. We're going to be facing significant challenges in this state. Hello lovely people of podcasts and welcome to another year in federal politics. Welcome back to the show. I'm Catherine Murphy, political editor of Guardian Australia and it's lovely to be back with you all. My guest today is an upstart and I mean that term generously. Keith Wallahan has just won pre-selection in the federal seat of Menzies in Victoria. Now Keith has managed to unseat the veteran conservative, Kevin Andrews. We're going to get into how that happened in this conversation and we'll get into all kinds of nuts and bolts. But let's start Keith. I was just saying before we started recording this conversation, we're doing this conversation remotely and also it's a little unusual for me because often on this podcast I speak to people whom I know very well. This is the first time Keith and I have met. So I'm curious and I know the listeners will also be curious because you have not been in public life before. Why don't we just start with who you are and your background so that we can tell people what you've done before heading in the direction of Canberra. Thank you Catherine and thank you for having me and welcome to your listeners. I wasn't born in Australia. I came here as a 10 year old with my family from Dublin Ireland. We tried to come earlier but our application, well their application came up short and we thought we weren't going to be able to make it. There's so many points that you need to come to Australia. But somehow someone changed their mind at the embassy and gave us a chance and said off you go. So in 1988 we landed in Melbourne and I said in my pre-selection speech that first night was at the Ngunnawadi Motor Inn in Melbourne which is still there and I still remember that night. At the time the exchange rate wasn't good. The economy wasn't great in Ireland so we didn't have much money and mum and dad started working out what we were going to do and what sort of life we would have. So it was a big risk that they took and that was how we started the journey to Australia. From there we settled in Ringwood which is in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne and we went to public schools and I was really grateful for the time that I had at public schools. I went to a school called Ringwood East Primary School. It was closed down by Jeff Kennett at one stage so my mum wasn't a big Jeff Kennett fan at the start but she came round. Then I went to Ringwood Secondary College and that's a school I'm very grateful for, for giving me the start in life. It was full of passionate wonderful teachers and as most public schools are it had people from a wide variety of backgrounds. I went through that school and was very fortunate to be elected school captain or head prefect it was called and that's where I first got a taste for running a campaign. I remember listening in year 7 to the head prefect give a speech and I thought to myself I'd like to do that one day. So as I got closer to year 12 I decided I'd start a campaign team to become head prefect and I think I had about five friends of mine that were all the campaign manager and they all thought they were the campaign manager which they were and it worked and it was really nice experience being able to be in charge of the school student decision making body but also learn how to do speeches and things like that. So that was up to high school. I'm happy to pause it there if you want me to keep going. No, no, no, no, no, it's alright. We don't need the entire contents of the log cabin but it gives people a sense of who you are and gives me a sense of who you are as well. But when you left school you've had two careers, haven't you? You've been in the military and you've had a career in the law. So how did you go from wanting to be head prefect to wanting to be a commando? No, you're right. I'll accelerate through the timeline quickly. So just curiosity really. I was at orientation week at university as you and anyone would know. You see all those tents and stalls and it's almost overwhelming all the different choices and I saw this dark green tent down in a corner and I just wanted to know what was inside and it was the army recruiting tent. And when I went in and I just became curious about officer training and signed up and from there I really enjoyed that and heard about this thing called Special Forces and Commandos. And again it was curiosity. I wanted to see what it was like and whether I could. And as you know curiosity kills the cat so I kept following curiosity down rabbit holes and that ultimately led to a really significant part of my life and something that I'm very grateful for. And then the law came after that, is that right? It did. I didn't get into law straight out of high school. I did economics and politics at Melbourne and then I was able to, when I finished that, do law at Monash University and that was really what I wanted to do all along and I always wanted to be a barrister. So being a barrister and the army were things I was really interested in from an early age. Okay. So we might come back a little bit to the military a little bit later but I want to get into some nuts and bolts first of all because again we've got lots of people who listen to the show who are massively into politics and will know intimately how pre-selections work but we also have people of course who would have no idea how pre-selections actually work. So why don't we just do a little bit of nuts and bolts about pre-selections in Victoria. What happens if you want to be pre-selected to be a Liberal candidate in Victoria, what's the process you go through? So the process involves, we have a governing body called the administrative committee and it's like a board for want of a better word and they are subject to constitutional requirements where we're governed by a party constitution and that constitution gives certain steps they have to follow to open up pre-selections. So they give a date, they open it up and there's a window to put your nomination in. So I fill in the form and it's a statutory declaration so it has to be very accurate and truthful and you have a fee that gets attached to that and you submit that form and that then when the date closes they know which seats are in contest and so when they opened it up for the 12 Liberal seats there was one that had a contest and then that's what starts another process which ultimately leads to a registration of delegates and the convention which was held last Sunday with just under 300 people. So the point of that is that Liberal party members have a say in selecting the candidate. It's sort of like it comes from the membership basically being pre-selected in a seat like Men's Easy because you've challenged the incumbent. That's right and that is a critical part of the process and there's certain criteria to be eligible to be a delegate. You need to have been in the party for two years. After a certain date you have to be enrolled in the electorate and there's certain conflicts of interest that aren't allowed. For instance my brothers and my wife are not allowed to vote but other than that you've earned the right to have your say and another important part of the process is that there's speeches and questions and it's quite an intense process but at the end it's a secret ballot so no one ever knows how anyone votes and I think that gives members the freedom to make their decision and there's a lot of people who and we'll get to this who think very highly of Kevin Andrews but I'm confident they voted to renew on Sunday and the secret ballot was a key part of that. Before we get to that and the result let's just track back one step. So the campaign now you've given us some an insight into your campaign for head prefect. Give us an insight into your campaign for menses. Obviously Kevin Andrews is a very well known political figure, 30 year veteran, had all kinds of flashing endorsements from all kinds of people in the Liberal Party, had cabinet ministers in Canberra making calls for him, canvassing for him. So how do you run a campaign in those circumstances without the flashing endorsements? I mean I could crack a joke and say did you stack the branch but the joke points to a serious question, right? When you're unseating an incumbent like Andrews how do you go about doing that? It's actually quite simple. It started with many members asking me to do it. They said they wanted to renew and they have been asking for many years and that's what started and if that wasn't that organic desire to renew it probably wouldn't have started. So when I started before even putting my nomination in I reached out to many of the members. I met with them, sat down with them and told them that I was seriously considering it and what were their thoughts. And that feedback guided the decision. If I had not, if I had received negative feedback I probably wouldn't have done it. But overwhelming feedback was yes please it's time to renew. And they all said they really like Kevin and respect him and respect his record but it's time to renew. And that just word renew kept coming again and again. And so from there that prompted me to go ahead and nominate. And then it was just getting out and meeting to people and listening to them and talking to them about what they think we should be doing better as liberals in this seat and nationally. And it was just a lot of conversations one on one and for the last month it was with my wife as well. We both went out to meet people and most of those conversations were 80% people talking and 20% us talking. It was really just listening and towards the end of the campaign you distribute a brochure and you talk about yourself. But I was an open book on all of the issues they were concerned about and there's no other silver bullet to it. It was really just engaging with people one on one and I think that's what really mattered. And then so when all the endorsements and phone calls came I think it was they were not really going to change people's minds and they knew they were coming. People were already in a different place. Is that what you mean? I'll never know that's just my guess. And I never finished a conversation with anyone asking what their vote was because I truly respect their right to vote in a secret ballot. So I never really knew where things were until the result came in and I think that's the way it should be. And I think at the last few weeks when all of the calls came and we told people we said we've been delegates before these calls will come and that's normal. So I think the delegates weren't surprised when those heavy endorsements came and the heavy calls came but I think they very politely and with respect held onto their secret ballot and that's what they treasured. It's really interesting isn't it? And I want to get into too in a tick some of the feedback you got about what needs to change and about the dynamics in the Victorian division which is sort of quite interesting. But first of all, I'll ask you this because a lot of listeners, readers, people whom I interact with on social media have asked me since you won the pre-selection, where do you sit in terms of the spectrum of the party? In Canberra there are obviously factions. I know the Liberal Party denies that there are factions but there are very clearly factions within the Liberal Party. But people who know you tell me Keith doesn't sit in a factional box. He's not a moderate, he's not a right-winger, people are describing you as a classical liberal. But anyway, rather than other people write your identity for you, you tell me where you sit in the spectrum of the Liberal Party. No, thank you for that. And you'd be aware there's a lot of commentary about identity politics from people but they're very quick to throw that identity on not just me but Liberal Party members more generally. And I think that's the destructive part of concentrating on factions too much because people are more complex than that and the members are more complex than that. I joined the Liberal Party in 1996 and of course there's factions. It's human nature that people do that. But I always found that when it came to pre-selections, factions stopped at the door. People realised, look, factions will come and go or someone's allegiance today will change next year. But what I'm deciding today lasts longer than that and it matters more. And I think that still mattered on Sunday. But as to your question as to where I sit, I think describing me as a classical liberal is fair. I strongly believe in the values of hope, reward and opportunity. I do care about freedoms. I am a passionate free speech person. But above all of that, I do want to be a person who doesn't just talk values. I want to be judged on my record for them because it's easy to say what people you think they want to hear. It's about how you act and how you stand up for those values that matters. And I think most people in Victoria on whatever faction they're in, they're at their heart, they're classical liberals. There's very few people in Victoria who use the word moderate. It's more, I think, a New South Wales specific term. Yeah, it is. That's true, Estenia. It's true. It is a more New South Wales construction and there's a faction in the, or well not a faction, but a group in the Liberal Party in Victoria who like modern liberals rather than moderates as a descriptor. And again, I don't want to tie us up too much in labels, but I'm just trying to establish where you sit in the firmament. Just a couple of quick questions that will be meaningful for listeners. This government, the Morrison government and the governments that preceded it, the Abbott and Turnbull governments, seems to me that this iteration of Liberal governments is more comfortable with government intervention than certainly the Howard government was that I followed, although Howard was also prone to dabbling in that space. Are you an economic dry? Is that how you describe yourself or are you completely comfortable with governments determining market outcomes, picking winners, all that stuff? My default position is that our economy prospers and is at its strongest when the government gets out of the way and that the free market is allowed to take those risks with certainty. And that's what I think has been a feature of Australia's prosperity for decades. However, what has happened in the last 12 months, unusual and serious times, and I'm not going to hold fast to economic theory when the times mean that that's not suitable. So, but for example, in war and in pandemics, of course there's a serious role for government intervention. Yeah, yeah, I wasn't even really referring so much to the fiscal stuff, which was just obvious common sense. Last year I meant more as a disposition in terms of where this government sits compared to others that have preceded it. The issue I'm obsessed with and our readers are obsessed with climate change. What's your view? My view is that there's a political and a policy dimension to this and I share the prime minister's view. I think this is a global problem and one of the best ways Australia can contribute to this global problem is leveraging our strengths in technology, whether it's engineers and scientists and our universities. I think it's not impossible that technology can help provide a silver bullet at some stage to help get the world through this. I think he's got the policy and the politics right on that. It's not easy, but I commend him on where he's landed right now. But the science, you accept the science? Yes, I do. And more than that, I live in an electorate, I live in Menzies. And for your listeners that don't know, it's 25% parkland. There's a lot of liberal people here, but they treasure the environment and they treasure the pristine environment that we live in. It's particularly in COVID. You see people walking along the Yarra, people walking their dogs in the parks, and that extends to their view of the world and our place in the world. And so I share their view that liberals have a role and a responsibility to talk about the environment, but in a responsible way. And I think the prime minister is doing that. Let's sort of land now on that feedback you got during the pre-selection from, I think you referenced it sort of early in the conversation, views from the grassroots about what needs to be different in terms of representation. Just a couple of obvious points, the Liberal Party underperforms in Victoria, both at the state level and the national level. And that has been the case for a few election cycles. So what are people telling you and what needs to change? Is the Liberal Party doing enough to present itself to the public as a broad church? Is the Liberal Party still appealing to young people? I know there are some colleagues of yours from Victoria who are genuinely concerned about that, whether or not enough is being done to appeal to the next generation. I know it's sort of fraught for a person who's only just achieved pre-selection and has not even yet moved fully into your next phase of public life to go there, but I'm very interested in your thoughts. What does the Liberal Party need to do better? No, and you're right, Catherine, I will qualify it. I'm a candidate, but it's a view I think almost all Liberals would share. The results speak for themselves. I don't want to be a commentator on state politics, but people desperately want to see a change after last year and they want Liberals to succeed in a quarter of a century. It's getting close to one term of state Liberal government. We all want that to change. Federally, it could be doing better as well. In 1990, the Liberal Party had 21 out of 38 seats. We now have 12. So the trend has been down and there's probably many reasons for that. But within the Liberal Party, I think people have this strong desire to get back to where we were, to get back to at least being more of an even split in this state because I think people refuse to accept that this is now just a Labour state. I've heard people say, oh, Victoria is the Massachusetts of Australia and I don't accept that. I think John Howard used to say that. He might have, yeah. Wasn't it John Howard? I think John Howard used to say that. But anyway, yeah, sorry, go on. But I think we should always look to improve and people, Menzies where I live is full of immigrant families who came here seeking a better life and they came here seeking a better life, seeking values of reward for effort, hope and opportunity and their core liberal values. And I'd like to think the Liberal Party has a wonderful story to tell immigrant families, particularly in the north of Melbourne and the west of Melbourne and the growth areas. And I think if we all make that effort to reach out to them and say, you know, we want to hear from you and what matters in your community, but let us tell you about what our party stands for because it's the same thing. It stands for the same things that brought you to this country. And I think if we do that and do that work, I think there's a lot of opportunity for the Liberal Party state and federally. It's not just communication, though, is it? Because I don't think notwithstanding the organic sort of move for generational change that you've referred to that sort of sat behind the pre-selection, Ryan, I don't think you would have come into public life without a view that it's more than packaging that needs to change. The Liberal Party is trying to basically, as you say, get back to parity in a state that is leaning very progressive. So it's I agree, it's not just repelling various groups in the community and it's connecting with them. But substantively, what do you think needs to change in order for Victoria, Victorian liberals to get back to parity? I think substantively, we need to recognize what problems and issues families are facing and to be a part of delivering solutions for them. We are entering a very challenging economic period as we move past March and insolvency laws, the freeze changes and a lot of the payments get wound back. We're going to be facing significant challenges in this state. And Victoria has had a very tough year. Obviously, there's the toll that families who lost lives during COVID, they're facing that. But the economic consequences are significant. I'm a barrister and have chambers in the city. And when you walk around the city, most of the cafes and restaurants, they're closed. They just started to open up. And then now we get this decision this morning. It's really hard for them. And then you speak to people in hospitality, even out in the suburbs and out here in Menzies. They've been doing it very tough. And some of them say, even now that I'm back on my feet, it's going to take me 10 years to earn that money back if everything goes well. So I think we first need to listen. And you don't talk at people. You get out and say, what can we do to help you? What problems are you suffering? And from there, I think then we can say, if we show that we care and that only starts if you actually really do care. If we do that and do that work, I think there's a lot of hope for the Liberal Party to help people in the state. Just very, I want to get into a sort of existential question with you to finish. I skipped past your military service. Obviously, there's been a lot of controversy around since the Barretian report about the SAS and conduct during the various tours of Afghanistan. It would be remiss of me not to ask you about that. What is your view about that? And has Barretian got it right? Does the SAS have a cultural problem? Does it need to change? I'm interested in your thoughts. No, I'm happy to. That report was made for heartbreaking reading. I come at this wearing two hats. The first is I'm a barrister of 10 years in Victoria. And 10 years ago, in one of my very first big cases was acting for two soldiers who were accused of war crimes related charges. Civilians were killed, children were killed. And that trial was a courts marshal went on for about a year and I acted for the team commander. I was junior to a Sydney barrister. And I saw what happened when there was a combat incident allegation and how important the presumption of innocence was. And in the end, they were not found guilty and the charges were thrown out as being wrong in law. But their lives were affected by that forever. And the destruction around their families, marriages broken up, it was really, really hard. So I've seen the pain that can be inflicted in this process. It's not easy and it takes a long time. And that process is only starting here. But my other hat is that I have served three tours as a commander officer and the second one I was a platoon commander. And it was heartbreaking reading to hear of the allegations there because I know so much sacrifice was made by Australian soldiers. And I know on the tour, I can only speak of the tour that I was on. We changed things so much to reduce civilian casualties and to protect the Afghan people because that was our mission. And so we went, for instance, from doing night raids to doing day raids. That's a massive increase in risk because it's easier to get shot at. It's easier to walk on an IED. But that was an important thing to do because if you risk civilian casualties, it's counterproductive to your mission. If a civilian is killed, well that family is just going to turn to the Taliban. That's completely understandable. So we did everything we could to try and reduce that. As to the cultural issues, I don't really know. And I think Justice Brereton, he is a very accomplished, well-regarded judge and two-star general in the reserves. He was the appropriate person to do that report and it took a lot of work. But now the work really starts. And I think the Defence Force has quite rightly split its response into two sort of divisions. The criminal process, which is now led by former Justice Mark Weinberg, gives me a lot of confidence. He is one of the most well-regarded criminal jurists ever out of Melbourne and he is the right person to be doing that. And that gives me confidence. And then the second part is the implementation panel because separate to the criminal process, there's an administrative process where defence is entitled to say, well, what can we look at culturally? What maybe went wrong? What leadership lessons are there to be learned? Because we have to fix that now because we need our Defence Force to be ready at any moment to defend us. But that culture case, is that something you experienced? The culture that was narrated through the Brereton Report and left a really searing impression in the minds of anyone who read it, is that familiar to you? In part, there's no easy answer to that. And I'm not dodging your question, Catherine. It's layered and difficult. The Special Operations Command, it's primarily got its SAS stream and it's got its commando stream. There's rivalry between the two and that can be healthy, but sometimes rivalry can go to an unhealthy place. And I know Special Operations Command is making a lot of changes to make sure it's on a healthy path. The other thing is that when I first joined the military decades ago, whenever you meet someone who was a commando or SAS, you just looked up to them and wanted to hear from them and talk to them. And everyone I met from SAS and Commandos were humble and compassionate and really kind. And then that struck me as a place that I wanted to go to then. It attracted me to it. It's possible that some people lost that and became more arrogant. And I think arrogance can take people maybe to dark places and that's something that needs to be looked at. But I don't want to label whole regiments like that. Overwhelmingly, people still are humble and compassionate and decent, but that's something the regiments need to look at. And I think they are right now. Thank you for that. So let's end this way. Things are a bit better, I think, in Canberra than they have been at various points over the last decade or so, which has been a highly disrupted period in politics. A lot of people I know, just from talking to people around, are put off from entering public life because they regard the life as brutal, combative, unsustainable. You lose your privacy. Everything you say becomes a matter, gets sort of chewed up by the culture war machine or worse. The life appears unviable to a lot of people. But here you are. You're a young bloke. You've worked really in a strange way towards this eventuality all your life. You're clearly ready to go, raring to go. Why politics? And do you think that there's no other way to put it other than directly, you know, politics can be a profession for mad people and by mad people, I mean real obsessive argumentative people. Why do you want to enter public life? What's it about for you? This is going to sound corny, but it's true. I am so grateful for everything, all of the opportunities that Australia gave me. So grateful. And when I stepped off a helicopter as a platoon commander for the first time in Afghanistan, I remember saying to a friend of mine, this must be what it feels like walking out onto Lords as the captain of the Australian cricket team. It was such a privilege and an honor to be doing that in our name. And at its heart was service and making a difference. All of us were only on this planet for a short time. And the best thing we can do is leave it a little bit better than we found it. And politics is clearly a way to leave a significant mark for good or bad. And I think that requires people putting their hands up. And I know you hear those stories about how difficult it is and I have a young family and the challenges that come with that. But I think that may be more determined to put my hand up because we want other people to do it. And I think if our political parties are strong, and we've seen in the United States when political parties are weak, the democracy is weak. So I think there's a lot of cynicism about politics and pre-selections and people talk about factions. But if our political parties, and I include the Labour Party and all the others, if they represent their community and their grassroots involved and they're democratic, then I think more people will put their hands up. And I think that's a good thing. So I think strong party democracy makes us a strong democracy. And that's a lesson I think we should all take from Sunday. It's probably good really. We're at the start of a new year. Let's end on a hopeful note. Okay, thank you for the conversation. I appreciate it. Good luck with the many adventures ahead because you've only really just reached sort of, I don't know, what's the sort of mountain climbing analogy you're sort of like, you're down the mountain, you're at base camp or wherever you are. I think I'm still at the airport lounge, I've just got out the door looking for a taxi. Yeah, possibly. Anyway, good luck with the adventure to come. Thank you obviously to the listeners. As I said, it really is great to be back. Thanks to Miles Martin Yoni, who's the EP of this show. Thank you to Hannah Isard. Get in touch. It's the start of the year. I'm keen to do a couple of episodes through the year, which is sort of like ask me anything episodes. Get in touch with me about stuff that you want to hear on the show, questions you want answered, all of that sort of stuff. I'm very, very easy to track down on social media. Get in touch. We'll be back with you next week.