 There's no world of Australian politics where Labor and the Greens can operate independently of each other and hope to be able to influence, you know, pass legislation and influence Australian politics because at the very least it requires good cooperation in the Senate. Well hello lovely people of the podcasts and welcome to another episode of Australian Politics Live. I'm Catherine Murphy, Political Editor of Guardian Australia and with me in the studio this week is two local compadres. We have the ACT Chief Minister Andrew Barr and we have Shane Rattenbury who is also the leader of the ACT Greens and are you still in your old ministry? Forgive me. No we've just had a reshuffle Catherine and I've just become the Attorney General of the ACT and I'm still doing a lot of the energy policy work. Well that's a relief. Okay so let's get into this conversation. I wanted to bring the gents in in a well it's been a high octane political week as we're recording the American election is yet to be resolved and it's hard for any of us I think to concentrate on anything other than that until that is resolved but anyway people around the country will know that the ACT had an election recently and Labor and the Greens were the have formed another coalition or minority government in the ACT. Now I'll just start with the easy question guys. It just forgive me but it doesn't really feel at the moment like the social democratic moment all in capitals if you sort of look at the political landscape. So why do you think you won? Well thanks Catherine. I'd say a combination of some external factors that are favoured incumbency. So in our case the bushfires over the summer I think was probably a real turning point galvanised our community made people recognise the importance of government and what it can do to support communities and in this instance to protect lives and property and then we had a pretty devastating hailstorm as well in Canberra that did a couple of billion dollars worth of damage. We were just getting over those two events plus the smoke of the summer time and then COVID hit. So I think what we've seen across the nation and internationally as well is where governments have handled sort of these major crises well voters have rewarded them with another term in office. But for us it wasn't just about getting the tick on competency around bushfire management and the pandemic it was also about the future and we had to and I was very conscious of this had to have a plan for the next term of government that outlined a positive vision of what we were going to do with that additional four years and for a long term government even though it's generally been a minority government through two decades to ask for a third, effectively the beginning of a third decade in office was going to require experience and new policy and I think we got that balance right. Shane, thoughts? Yeah and for those with those contextual issues that Andrew put out there as the Greens we sort of put forward this idea that 2020 has shown us that business as usual doesn't cut it. That we as political leaders we need to be making sure we are mapping out a different way whether that is tackling the climate crisis or addressing issues of housing affordability or frankly income inequality which is growing in Australia. These issues have been really laid bare this year particularly by the pandemic and the economic consequences of it and so we talked very much about that desire and I think the other factor that played out was that the Liberal Party as the opposition party ran a very particular agenda around cost of living and I think in the Canberra electorate people were looking for a greater vision than that. It was a very narrow focus. We saw a whole lot of Boris Johnson style stunts from the leader of the opposition and I think the community did not get behind that either so the combination I think of both ourselves and the Labor Party running quite positive and forward looking agendas and the narrow focus of the Liberal Party really for me was the deciding factor in the election. And you guys have known each other for a fair while I think. Well yes I was recalling where I first heard about this echo commerce student from ANU who was going to run on the Green Alliance ticket for student politics in 1993 and that's when I think I first met Shane. I think I can probably say this but most of the student Labor people thought he was a young Lib. It's true, it's true yes. Why? Well I had a lot of friends who played rugby and that was sort of associated with the more liberal crowd at university and quite a few friends that came from country areas and I think that a lot of assumptions were made there despite the fact that I spent a lot of my university time down in the southeast forests on protests, organizing forest related protests in Canberra, those sort of things with actually someone who's now my chief of staff. We were in the environment club together at uni so I'm interested. It is always funny to hear that. To hear someone else narrate your history. Well yes, I'm pretty apparent to us reasonably quickly. I mean in the context of this at ANU in the early 1990s was quite a broad coalition of really progressive forces but it came off the back of needing to win the student union and the student's association off the Liberal Party and so all of the progressive forces from the right wing of the Labor Party to the left wing of the Labor Party to the environment movement, even the international socialist organization may well have run candidates and preferences and we won. I would say it's probably one of the first early political lessons for progressive politics. We've got to find a way to work together. That's how we beat the conservatives. And were you mates or were you transactional allies? I think more acquaintances initially. Shane was in the works of commerce law weren't you principally and I was in the arts economics faculty so we crossed over a little bit but no it was I think it was later. Shane then went off to do some other things before our paths crossed again around I think probably just before the 2008 election. You know it's been a few years overseas so I was completely in a different scene for quite some time there. Went and did the expat thing, travelled the world. I headed up the oceans campaign at Greenpeace International so quite a different career for a while there. Right okay and does the longevity help or is it a barrier to entry sometimes? No, no I think it gave me a very good perspective on the issues Shane's been passionate about and I know they're genuine and lifelong. That's very clear and then I remember having this sort of very similar conversations with my colleagues at around the time of the 2008 election when Shane was elected as to all these new Greens in the parliament who are they, well what do we know about them and I was able to recount the story that I don't largely just have to my colleagues. You're being quite quiet Shane. I'm sensing there's an untold story behind your... No, no, no, no look my flirtation with university politics was probably only that one election. I mean I didn't really do university politics at all. We were very much more sort of in this environment group doing our thing and it was a bit of a sideline but it is, I guess it's a story of Canberra to an extent. It is not that big a city. And one of the nice things about the city is you do make these connections again at different points in life with people and this one's turned out funny and down the years, well over the last decade or so that I've been in the Assembly and Andrew got there a couple of years before me, necessity has made us work together but I think we've been able to find a really constructive way to do it and having some of those shared touch points in history I think helps that. It opens doors in a way that... Yes, that otherwise wouldn't. Would you say you trust each other? And that's, it's sort of, I ask that in the loaded sense of politics, right? That it's sort of like politics is often more about transactions than trust but would you say you trust one another? I think we've really built that over a number of years in the sense that again probably by necessity at the beginning we started to work together but through working on a range of things where you both share views, people don't go out and leak them to the media, you have understandings that people stick to, that trust builds up over time and so certainly come this election particularly where you come out the other side and you've got to sit down to make a governing arrangement. Having that understanding that you know that you can say something frank to somebody in a room and it won't something appear on the front page of the paper creates a really strong foundation for being able to work through some hard issues. And we'll get to the nuts and bolts of the governing agreement in Attic but because there's more greens now in the assembly Shane, right? So, and forgive me because I have been preoccupied both with the federal scene and the American election so and I know you guys have been, you were sworn in yesterday or the day before or whatever. I'm conscious there's more greens so are there more greens in the ministry now? There are, that's what I thought. So the numbers in the ACT are a lot simpler than the US election. For those that aren't from Canberra we have a 25 member assembly. As a result of this election the greens tripled our representation, we went from two to six, the Labor Party's on nine and the Liberal, sorry the Labor Party's on ten and one more. One more, come on. Yes, ten and eleven, yeah. So between Labor and Greens we have 16 of the 25 seats now and as part of this agreement I was the only Green Minister in Cabinet previously. Yes. We now have three. Well this is sort of, this is what I want to ask you, it's previously you have been the green in the government, it's been a solo act and you too have a relationship which sets up this whole proposition. Obviously heading into this term of government then you've got, you've got a little caucus to whip and you guys have got to work out an operating tempo where there's not one green in the government, there's three greens in the government. So how's that going to go? I think that's a real question for us. As the Greens we've now got to put in place a series of internal structures that we've not needed in the past from very basic things like party room rules to how we are going to operate with a number of ministers in Cabinet and I think that's going to be a question for the whole Cabinet. The Cabinet is, it operates in I think a very positive way in the sense that people tend not, as they're what might be called the outsider, as the Greens sitting in the Labor Cabinet as I have been for the last couple of terms, you know it's not obviously driven by factions. I'm sure that stuff happens but the ALP factions have is a black box to me. The ministers have come in and we just discuss things in I think a pretty open way and so again that gives me confidence that we'll be able to bring a couple more Greens into the discussion without it becoming some factionalised Cabinet at least. That's the spirit I'm hoping for. Yeah but it's kind of a butterfly effect isn't it though? You never know what, what, and I'm not putting the mockers on this at all but you never know what extra dimension, if the picture changes ever so slightly you don't really know in advance how that's going to play out like what the reaction is from Labor folks and also from Green folks. I'm bound and acutely aware of that and I think there's a big onus on me as the chair of the Cabinet to ensure that we have a consensus based approach to decision making and where we don't immediately reach consensus that we take the time. If issues are contentious then we can come back to them. We don't need to have rushed decision making. Making stuff up on the run is not going to necessarily be helpful nor contribute to good governance. Again for national listeners the Parliament's 25, the executive is 9. The 9 are 6 Labor and 3 Green and within the 6 Labor they are evenly split between the different wings of the Labor Party so there's 3, 3 and 3 for those who are very factually minded but again the way we have operated our Cabinet is and I sort of take Shane as my proof point here is that he would not necessarily know in a Cabinet meeting you know that's the left wing view and that's the right wing view. It's not been the way that things have operated and that I think is possible in a smaller group. It can become really destructive if people sort of just move into little blocks particularly when there's such a small number of ministers. It's not like you've got a group of 30 here and trying to organise that probably does need a degree of the discipline that comes with larger parties. But it is an important thing for me will be how the Greens Party manages Cabinet and non-executive membership and that's something Shane and I can talk about. Although the Greens are going to pick up entirely Labor's operating arrangement but we have governed for a period with Cabinet ministers and people on the back bench and managing those tensions and ambitions is what every Government Party of Lota has to do. Yeah it's part of the job description but interesting nonetheless. So tell us about the agreement fellas. Obviously we don't have to do this exhaustively but in the broad what does it cover? What does it deliver? Well it covers stability of Government and sort of the machinery things that are necessary to run an effective Government and then it's incredibly policy rich. It represents the amalgamation of some of our election commitments whilst keeping the absolute integrity of both what we put forward, smartly bringing a number of them together to deliver. Actually in some instances improved. I think we probably both step back and go oh we probably should have thought of that one before the election. We got together and put that in place particularly on climate action but also in our response to housing and homelessness. A big investment coming in in social housing. And then there's I guess a series of other policy and legislative reforms that would fit in the social policy category as well I think has some really important jobs and economic recovery measures that we've both signed up to. And what do you want to highlight Shane? Well I think one of the real strengths of the agreement, this is the third or fourth iteration of it now and it gets tweaked every time but there's a clear ability there for the parties to work together to collaborate but if we do disagree we've got the mechanisms to resolve those disputes and I think what's for me really important in that is we can actually disagree on something, go into the Parliament and potentially vote separately but still keep governing. That doesn't lead to the collapse of the Government. I think there's a maturity in that that actually enables us to sometimes get through the tough moments and there are points where disagreement comes along. It's not the main focus but it gives us that sort of safety valve for making sure that we're able to have that difference and just move on and keep governing because the community, that's what they want us to do. They want us to deliver. Yes, well they actually want outcomes. With this dispute, just call it the dispute clause for one of a better location. Does it envisage that if disputes happen about a particular policy issue that you folks would vote as blocks or could it be like, I don't know, I'm completely extemporising here but let's say Labor was on board for a particular thing and one of your caucus was, Shane, could sign up to that but two of you couldn't. What would you do then? Is it envisaged that in order for the functionality of this thing that you've got to preserve caucus solidarity? That's a Labor tradition, right? The caucus, the ding-dong happens, then everybody accepts the decision. There's no kind of wandering about but you guys are making up your own processes or developing your own processes. So I mean, this is slightly in the weeds but I'm just curious. Sure. Well, the structure allows for an amendment process to it. So there could be, there's agreement in principle but wanting to sort of look at the detail then there's a within cabinet amendment process that Greens ministers or indeed Labor ministers can bring forward because there will be Greens ministers who will be bringing forward proposals for government approval and that may require the Labor Party to see. Sure, absolutely. It cuts both ways. Then there is a mechanism for agreement in principle but amendments to be moved on the floor of the parliament and then there is the, I guess, the last resort which is we just cannot agree and then really then there's a matter, I presume this will principally be the case for the Labor Party but where you take something to the floor of the parliament and if we couldn't get the Greens to agree to it then we'd need the opposition to agree to it. Yeah, maybe the Libs do. My past experience is that most of the issues, 80, 90% of them can be resolved by amendment discussion within the cabinet. About 5% are resolved by amendment on the floor and the Libs take their chances there and then there are a bunch of issues where Shane gets to issue the media release which says the old parties have ganged up on the Greens. We could, we could, we could, we could, we could, we could, we could, we could, we could call that gratin' brain. It does still happen. Yes, yes, anyway, yeah. Okay, can I ask this, I want to sort of bring us out to some broader concepts associated with this agreement now but one of the sort of points of tension between Labor and the Greens federally and in the other state jurisdictions are these endless turf wars over seats that basically you're prosecuting the same battles for the same number of, usually in urban seats, not exclusively but often and that for many progressive voters looks like a zero sum game that is deeply irritating to people, right? So does it, is one of the reasons why, just call it a de-escalation effect of the arrangements in the ACT because the voting system here basically pits you all against one another all the time, right? Like the tickets in the seats, it's not, it's like, you know, here's, here's the seat, here's the number of would-be candidates in this seat. In essence, you all run against each other, right? I mean, it's a bit simplistic, but it's sort of like, and obviously there's how to vote tickets and all that stuff, but... Not so much and I think that's possibly one of the reasons. Educate me, Andrew. Educate me. Look, I could spend half an hour on this but I'll try and do it in 30 seconds. In essence, yes, there is some competition between the two parties but because it's proportional representation, there is an expectation, certainly in the electorate, the chain and I both represent that the Greens are going to win a seat under their own steam on first preferences. And so we actually were able to collaborate in our seat, anyway, through Labor preferences, got a second Green up and we defeated a Liberal. And so our electorate, which has five members, now has four, two Labor, two Green and one Liberal. And so that is helpful when we can in fact collaborate to take a seat off the Liberal Party. Yes, exactly. A bit harder for the Labor Party when in this election there were a couple of marginal seats in the outer suburban areas that went Green on Labor preferences. But I note that in previous elections they went Labor on Green preferences. So there are swings and roundabouts in the system. It's the nature of Hare Clerk. There are fine margins and for us, we had a great election this time. We picked up four seats, interestingly, two of them from Labor and two of them from Liberal in terms of where things fell. So I was very happy with them winning seats off the Libs, not so much about them. But it comes down to just where you fall on that line and the way the accounting system is done. Yes. Yeah, but I get that, but it's sort of like, and you're talking about new concept, like actively constructive arrangements in order to get more progressive candidates up, right? I mean, obviously this happens federally in the states as well, but it's a bit unusually so here, but it's, yeah, I don't know. It's, obviously the voting system is more favorable to Greens candidates than the voting system that exists at the national level. I'm just fascinated by the de-escalation that can happen here. Well, I might, one other quick observation that, you know, just look at the recent Queensland state election. There were two seats that the Greens won, one where it was essentially a Green-Liberal contest that the Greens won on Labor preferences. And again, I'm comfortable with that. That's if Labor can't win the seat, then it should, we should support another progressive party. The one that is harder and more challenging and really hits on the point that you've raised here was South Brisbane. Yes. Effectively had a contest between probably two of the most progressive women in Australia. A progressive off, a massive progressive off. Yes. But I mean, that reflects the seat too. It is a very progressive seat. That's where it's difficult. I think I look to Victoria and there's seats South of the Yarra that, you know, where the Greens had a serious crack at winning some seats off the Liberal Party. That sort of thing. I mean, if there can be a little bit more focus on that, I think that serves both parties well. But I understand and acknowledge that there are other areas where, you know, where like in Melbourne, the federal seat of Melbourne and others where the Greens are in a contest with the Labor Party. And that's where it becomes difficult to manage. Our electoral system allows for that, but there's still a little bit of tension there. But my view on this is that, well, that should sharpen up the Labor Party's approach to campaigning. We've got to get good candidates. We're going to run good grassroots campaigns and their swings and roundabouts in politics. This team have had an excellent result this time. But in our parliament, there's five marginal seats effectively. And they're holding all five of them at the moment. So that's true. The other thing that's different here, Catherine, is, you know, and I've looked at, for example, the Tasmania model where our party had a similar result where we had two cabinet ministers in a Labor government down there and we held five seats, 25 member parliament, very similar situation to the ACT. What we don't have here is some of those really divisive issues that the Labor Party particularly struggles on in relation to the Greens. So whether it's forestry or mining, that really split the two parties when you get to that sort of union end of the Labor Party. We don't have those here. And that takes some of that big tension away. I'm very glad you brought that into the conversation because of course, Canberra is a unique electorate in that sense. So many ways. So it's true. Just educated electorate, Catherine. No, no, no, no. Well, it is different here. Things are different here. And that also influences the sort of call it the general amity or equanimity in the system. One really other quick point here is that, for example, on energy policy, which has been diabolical across the nation, our move to 100 percent renewable energy in the ACT is a job creator. We went from importing 100 percent coal fired energy. We now have thousands of jobs in our city as a result of our 100 percent renewable electricity target, which we've now achieved. And one of the policies we're collaborating on in this next phase of government is renewable energy as an economic driver for our economy. More jobs and will produce and store more of our power ourselves. Yes. Yes. Yeah, absolutely. What about compromise? It's sort of perhaps I'm just bloodied by the federal system and bloodied by existing, as I do in a digital media publication and with a fairly substantial online presence. Right. I'm constantly sort of assailed by people who are not interested in compromise, not interested in dialogue. I want basically we seem to be in the basis of political movements in society because of the algorithms of the social media. We seem to be more and more a generalization, of course, wanting our views reinforced rather than the sort of general, what I would call the kind of fundamental dynamism of progress, which is persuasion, which is changing people's minds. Right. So an agreement like this, notwithstanding all the you know, the what we've just been talking about for the last few minutes, which is Canberra is another country. We have a different electoral system here. We don't have some of the, you know, the sort of material versus post material debates here that exist in other states. How do you guys go though with your own base and with community perceptions sort of fronting up with a compromise model? Because this is what this is. So how do you find that? Or again, are we in another country? So this isn't a big deal. It's still challenging. And we, I think what one of the things are going to make this work over over the next four years is that Shane and I continue to talk through issues, but look ahead to I've learned anything in politics. It's yes, you've got to be in the moment and in the week and a day or a week is a long time in politics, but you've also got to have your sort of medium and long term view about these questions. And if you observe all of the trends that you've highlighted there, think about how those impact on politics, on the economy, on society. I think, and I've reached the conclusion that it means cooperation, full consensus building and compromise, because you can have 80% of what you want or you can get 100% of nothing. Yeah. What do you think, Shane? And I think despite all the comments you made, there's also a yearning in the community for cooperation. Oh yeah. Yeah. We hear it said, but we often don't see it reflected then in some of the commentary that you talk about, but it is challenging for us as well. You know, a lot of the, well, we get feedback from people saying, oh, you don't take it up to the Labour party enough because they don't see that we do have disagreements and we work on things and we push each other to find these ways through. But we do a lot of that, I guess behind the scenes. And by the time it comes out into the public domain, we've sorted those things out and we've found a way through, which I personally think is a good thing. You know, it is about getting on with it, but people don't see that. And so we get some feedback from people saying, well, we don't see you enough. And so I find that hard of judge because actually I'm more interested in the outcomes. Yes. What was... I mean, it's amusing. I get the, I just have to the green still. Yes. But this is the thing, you know, you will get these, you will get this feedback. What I would say though, is that, you know, that healthy tension at times has led to some pretty innovative and clever and nation leading policy outcomes. And so maybe it's a reflection of our personalities, but I think we are both a little bit more policy driven than many of our counterparts. That's the observation I would make in terms of leadership around other, you know, without casting any exposure to any of the... No, no, no. But, you know, we're both in it for the policy outcomes. And my sense of, you know, what the role the ACT can play within the Australian Federation is a leadership role. We're small, yes, but we can get some really good things done if we're prepared to compromise along the way. And I've sort of come back to that 80% rule. It's encapsulated for me, you know, in a great Mick Jagger, Keith Richards song, you can't always get what you want. But if you try sometime, you just might find you get what you need, Catherine. Well, yes, yes. Lordable, Shane. And that smallness that Andrew has given me, it gives us an agility as well as we can get things done. I think there's also a challenge upon us as leaders of our respective parties to make sure we take our supporters on that journey with us. And I think what they've started to do is they've started to trust us that even though it's sort of unsure sometimes, we are getting the outcomes. And so certainly my support base is very happy with the fact that we are now at 100% renewable electricity. We've started to build cameras like Rail Network. We've had all these reforms that have been really important to us for a long period of time that, you know, the low party, it's not perhaps not disagreed with, but perhaps haven't prioritized. But in working with us, those things have come forward. I think that's also helped people see that it's actually worth it. Yeah, we went into this election nervous. Historically, right around the world, and there's been academic papers down this way, you've got two party governments, a larger party and a smaller party. At most elections, the smaller party does badly. And they posit the reasons for that are if the government goes badly, the small party is sort of the balance of power holder who's expected to fix everything gets the blame and loses seats. If the government goes well, the big party tend to get the credit for it. And that has been observed right across Europe and in all sorts of places. So for us to actually triple our representation at this time really bucks that international trend. And it gives me confidence that our supporters think that we are doing this the right way. I mean, both of you thoughtfully say what we're delivering to both our constituencies in the event that they are suspicious of compromise is outcomes. And if we continue to collaborate and deliver the outcomes, then we can bring our people with us. But I wonder whether or not, and I mean, this is unknowable, but whether accommodation or dynamics in this term may require both of you to be slightly more performative in the deliberation and the resolution of disputes, right? It's sort of just listening to both of you. I don't think it's the theatre of politics. Well, no, but it's sort of a superficial thing to say, but listening to both of you talk, right? What I hear in the room is we have a relationship. We trust one another that goes broader than transactions. We trust one another to have really quite difficult conversations and not see that on the front page of a newspaper. We trust one another to run a closed process. Right. So that we can deliberate until we're done. Then we turn up and we have presto. Because between 2008 and 2012, we had where the green sat on the crossbench and Labor tried to govern in minority. So we'd have our process inside the cabinet and then we'd have to go and negotiate with the crossbench and then we'd have to bring it back inside the cabinet. This is more efficient. Much more efficient. No, no, I'm not dissing it. But I just wonder, obviously, it's more efficient obviously. And the benefits, you know, the benefits you've both been able to articulate very clearly. But I just wonder whether, well, I suppose, look, old fashioned, it's kind of like a test of leadership, isn't it? Like, do you bring your bases with you by delivering the outcomes and saying, trust us, we've got decent judgment. We've got the runs on the board. Just keep coming with us. This is where we're going. Or does this require a more performative approach? I don't know. You guys tell me. One of the challenges, we've certainly got this term in having a bigger team, is managing some of those expectations even within our own group. And as the Greens, we'll now start to face some of the challenges that the big parties have always faced, which is a broader church within our own group, a range of expectations. We've now got some who get to be ministers and some who've not. That's been a comfortable process for us. It's sort of now. We're naturally self-selected. But those things will change over time. So we're going to face some challenges. And I'm certainly having to think about that as the leader of the group and with five brand new members, is how do we learn to deal with those things ourselves? And the Greens are still relatively a young political party compared to the Labor Party having worked those things out in their ways over time. Yeah. Yeah. One quick observation that I'd like to think I've helped Shane understand a little bit about the internal culture of the Labor Party and the challenges that I face as the leader. I think the next step, particularly now with six Greens, is I will need to better understand over time the dynamics of that group and understand where they're coming from. But our number one principle operating procedure is no surprises. And so if, you know, I genuinely now after working in a cabinet with Shane for eight years, I'm pretty good now at knowing where particular issues are going to emerge are going to be problematic. And if I get it wrong, he can tell me. Yeah. And I'm not offended by that. And it's another thing I've learned. And my adage in politics, I've been around for a little while now, is that I try not to repeat mistakes. I'll acknowledge I will make a mistake and I'll make new ones in this term. But I don't want to repeat mistakes that I've made in the past. And I only want to make the mistake once and then, yep, right. Got it. Understand now and we'll move on. And so a little bit of forgiveness as well. Things will go wrong. I mean, look, yesterday, the Greens announced something that I sort of knew was coming. It was a little bit of a surprise. And Shane said, yep, sorry, should I told you? And it's like, yep, OK, understand. Apology accepted. We move on. Yeah, right. I think that highlights that politics is really just about human dynamics in so many ways. And the ability to just walk down the corridor and have a conversation and maybe say, look, sorry, we got that wrong. Or, hey, we're unhappy about this. We think you guys have done this and we didn't think that was fair or whatever. Having the maturity just to go and do that, it sounds really toy almost to just say that it actually is very basically comes down to that human dynamics sometimes. Well, it's why we're all here. I mean, because this life is insane, right? So we were all drawn to it because Shane gets through it without drinking coffee. I don't drink coffee either, but that's not by choice. That is not by choice. Anyway, we're really on the clock now, guys. But just quickly, all this sort of outbreak of maturity in my podcast is sort of contrary to some of the dynamics that occur in this podcast. But anyway, that's been refreshingly so. There's an obvious question here. What about coalitions nationally? Now, conventional wisdom is certainly after the 43rd parliament, there's all kinds of hand ringing about what that did or did not do right or wrongly. In Queensland, there was all these sort of muscular statements in Queensland from Labor about we'll do a deal with the grains, you know, like never. Right. So that's that's the norm, as it were. You guys are cutting against the grain. Is there like, should we should Labor and the grains be thinking about some form of coalitionism nationally? I have a feeling it's inevitable as much as my federal colleagues don't like that. I think it's certainly the place for it to start is in the Senate, where it is institutionally a fact that the Greens will be winning one, possibly two senators in each state for the foreseeable future. And so that's a good starting point of proportional representation system and you need collaboration. Federally, it's pretty hard to see Adam Barrett not being the member for Melbourne for, you know, for some time to come. So I think there's a sense of an everybody about it, but it needs a degree of management and it's going to need some mature leadership. Is that what's lacking? I get the sense that at the moment, there's still, there's still a little bit of bitterness around around particular individual seat contests. Yeah. That just make it make it hard at the moment. But then I observed that the Liberal and National Party have these same issues and yet they manage a coalition arrangement. And so it's just, there's no world of Australian politics where Labor and the Greens can operate independently of each other and hope to be able to influence, you know, pass legislation and influence Australian politics because at the very least it requires good cooperation in the Senate. Now, you know, Labor may aspire to be able to win a House of Reps majority in our own right. And that's not an unreasonable aspiration, but on the times when, you know, we fall one or two seats short and the Greens have one, two, three, four or five or however many lower house seats that, you know, they're likely to win in the foreseeable future. I mean, what they're going to turn down government on the basis of, you know, of not accepting the vote of another progressive MP and the exact terms of the governing arrangements and all of that I understand are much more complex at a national level. I get that. But this thing in the end, having Labor's not won an election in its own right for what? Kevin Rudd in 2007. Yeah Rudd in 2007. Outside of that won since Keating in 93. That's not a great track record. We've just won six elections in a row, admittedly in a more progressive jurisdiction. But I think there's something in our formula that probably should be applied nationally. I think it also takes time. When we first won the Balance of Power in 2008, that was a much harder term. When we sat on the crossbench, we were all brand new members. We didn't ask or decide to go into the ministry at that point in time. But it also, it does go a lot to the style of the leaders. It'd be fair to say the Chief Minister at that time wasn't so enamoured with working with the Greens, whereas the successes, Katie Gallagher, who's now in the Senate, of course, and then Andrew have taken an approach where they have seen value in collaborating more than sort of trying to just knock the Greens off again. And I think that that builds up over time and that starts to create fertile ground then for doing more work together. So if you're counting or you're minimising yourself slightly in that conversation, it's yes, it requires maturity on Labor's part for sure, but they've got to have a dance partner they can work with. Oh, sure. So that's why I'm asking about maturity, not to be gratuitous, not to make personal reflections on individuals. But that's sort of like, if we just track back to the 43rd briefly, everybody, Greens and Labor are proud of the achievements that emerge from that parliament. But there is this residual, I don't know even what you'd call it, post trauma about how that was. The other reason would be trauma trauma. No, of course. But not about policy. That's the fascinating thing. No, but that's the thing. But it's also how things looked and were presented as well as the policy. So it's sort of like, I suppose I'm struggling to work out how various personalities walk back from that period and then reset. And it requires, which goes back to the compromise point and whether or not your respective political movements can compromise as well. So I think we have to, if we're going to get the policy outcomes, and which is, I guess, where this conversation is very much gone today, if you want to get those outcomes, even now, then you've got to have the willingness to take that step back or forget about an old grudge. They're the sort of things that do get in the way. Again, coming back to that notion about just human relationships, you know, any relationship, if you hold on to the grudges, you are stuck in the past and you can't move forward. Well, that's a very nice note to end on. Hope for the future. And hope for the future. Andrew wants to get hope up. Let's get hope up. We definitely need to get hope up. Thank you so much for listening. I really do appreciate your time. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who is the executive producer of this show. Thank you to Hannah Isard, who often cuts the show for us. Thanks to my guests. We'll be back next week.