 Well, there is an argument that you could go full Trump. Now, I know Guardian listeners might fall off their... Well, come on. Everyone in this pod cave just fell off the chair. But the Trumpian approach is, damn the budget consequences. We're just going for it. So I want to grow the economy really, really fast. He is running a trillion dollar deficit. Hello, good people of pods. It's Catherine Murphy, and you are on another slightly chaotic episode of Australian Politics Live. Today we're going to be talking about the economy. And I have Shane Wright to the left of me. Shane Wright, thank you for joining us, Senior Economics Correspondent for the Nine... SMH and the Age, thank you. That's always my preference too. And of course, the delightful and redoubtable Greg Jericho. Oh, well, that was very... What is redoubtable? I know, it sounds good though. It's all right, isn't it? Yeah, I'm going to run with it. Anyway... Does that mean you... Is that the opposite of doubtable? Well... I don't know. Or a question... I can redoubt. Isn't a redoubt? To do it again. Redoubtable. No, I think that is a compliment. Well, I certainly meant it as that. Redoubt. Oh, well, anyway, the listeners will say that. I'm just thinking of the movies who look at it. No, it doesn't mean you're a... Soon the final redoubt. You're a substantial person, doesn't that... Then we'll go with that. Anyway, Greg Jericho, my Guardian Australia colleague, and Man of Facts and Charts. And anyway, as discussed in slightly chaotic fashion, we are talking about the economy today because this week we have seen the latest GDP figures. September quarter. September quarter. So, both of these gents know that I've had, on the day that we're recording this, that I've had my head well and truly in the medevac legislation. So, I'm not burdened with too much information in this conversation. So, these guys are going to tell me about the GDP and about the economy more generally. So, Shane, why don't you kick off, GDP? Big numbers, 0.4 through the quarter of September, lower than expected market was looking for about 0.6. Annual was 1.7, which is roughly where most people thought we had a couple of little upward revisions. But the main figure out of it is 0.1, which is the minuscule increase in household consumption through the quarter. Household consumption... Oh, hang on. So... Oh, hold on. Oh, God, you've got me now. This is important. Oh, all over you, this. No, okay. So, really, did that happen? So, household consumption, 0.1 for the quarter. It is the worst quarter of household consumption since December 2008. And December 2008 was when everyone purchased some canned goods and went looking for a cave because the global financial crisis was upon us. And of all the quarters since the start of this century, there's only been four worst performers and three of them were around the GFC, which actually goes to why the Rudd government at the time was throwing so much money at consumers because household consumption makes up, what, 60... Yeah, about 55% to 60%. 60% of GDP. So, if consumers aren't spending, then you're starting a long way behind the mark. Right. And so, picking up the story, so obviously, the government was hopeful that tax cuts and record low interest rates would make the consumer less cautious. However... However, no, they've decided to be more cautious and save all that money. The savings ratio rose 4.5. 4.8. You're doing seasonally adjusted. I'm sticking with the trend, but anyway. Or you're just wrong. Probably. Yeah, see... High since March 2017. Yeah. So, savings ratio went up. So, we're saving more of our income. One little sort of stat to know, to alert you to know that things aren't that good is, in the past year, government spending contributed more to economic growth than did household spending. That only happens when you're either in a recession or it's GFC time. And so, even though the government was quite chipper that the growth has risen, I mean, 1.7% is pathetic, if we're being honest. Officially crap. Yeah. I think it's the word I used. Yeah. And if you take away government spending and exports, which the mining sector is still doing well, still shipping off lots of coal and iron ore, but if you take those away, then the domestic private sector is going backwards. Private demand shrank over the year. GDP per capita was flat. So, of five last quarters, it's been flat or negative. Three of those quarters. So, that's just telling you how much population growth is keeping the economy floating along. And just how little impact is coming through from punters like you, me, and all your listeners. Hmm. Well, God, that's quite a lot to get your hair around, isn't it? Well, we try here, don't we, Greg? I mean, one positive little thing is that for the first time in a while, real household disposable income went up, but it only went up because of the tax cuts flying through. It didn't go up because of the reason why you wanted to go up, and that's because you're getting more income, you're getting better wages, and so forth. The actual, if you look at the income in real gross household income, it was flat, and it's been flat for about three years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Three, four years. Well, we all know. So, the government is, both the Prime Minister and the Treasurer were growing about household income rising, but it really was just as a result of the tax cuts, and that's what they're meant to do. But what they're then meant to do is to spur economic growth, and that is to come from spending, and what these figures show is that did not happen at all. Which takes me, I'm going to take to you to a theory of mine, which I've been working on for some time. Oh, gorg. No, it was gorg. Yes. So, ahead of the tax cuts, you had young Joshua and everyone else saying, right, people will go out and spend. In fact, the Treasurer mentioned it in his budget speech, saying, was saying, this, hoping this will, people go out and spend this money. Yeah. And even on the day that the laws, the tax cuts were passed, that was the whole theory that people will go out and spend. Now, that was based on a theory within Treasury that people would get the low and medical income tax offset, $1,080, and go and spend it. Economists thought, right, now we'll look back to what happened in GFC. Maybe they'll spend half of it. What I think has happened is that Treasury has not looked at what has traditionally happened when people get their tax refunds. And this is, remember, the tax offset is a refund. And as a boring nerd that I am, I've gone through the original, what happens in original spending on retail through the July to October period, going back the best part of the last two decades. You cannot see when tax refunds come through. People don't go out and spend their tax refunds. Well, it makes sense, actually. They, and... You pay off your credit card. Or credit card or bills, because often people get their quarterly power, water, rates, bills, all come in around that, but somewhere between July and October. So, and I went thinking, right, because my original theory was, right, people will get this and they'll spend a bit of it. And that's what Treasury is thinking. But if you look through the data on what actually has happened over the years when all these, like last year, it was about $15 billion worth of tax refunds flowed between July and October. But you cannot see it in retail spending. It doesn't get spent that way. And I think that's where Treasury has got into a problem. Not problem, but that they've misconstrued what would happen. Well, what consumers normally do. Or know what happened previously when they got a check, which was the Rudd stimulus check, which was, please go and spend this. We want you to go and spend it. If you're young enough to remember, yep, go down to see young Jerry Harvey. He was younger then. Go down and spend it and we'll get the economy going. This has been looked at and treated quite differently by Australian consumers. And do you think, possibly, Greg, I quite like this theory. I like it. I'm on board with it. Yeah, I like a lot. God, you guys easily sway. Well, no, but it makes sense, Shane. It's quite good. But the- You're a surprise worry about me too. Wow, you made sense, Shane. Oh, come on. I've been on the back foot since redoubtable in this conversation, let's be honest. Greg, do you think, possibly, and I mean, it's obviously much more complicated than that, because the reasons we're not spending at the moment are not to do with the lack of a government direction, right? This will, where I'm going will make sense in a sec. We're not spending because we're heavily indebted, because we're anxious and we're prioritizing saving and trying to be less heavily indebted, right? But as Shane was just saying, indigo, back in the olden days of the GFC, when Kevin Rudd brought us in for that special press conference on that Sunday with Ken Henry and various things, it was very, very clear, the message to consumers, right? Your economy needs you to get this check, go to Jerry Harvey or JB Hifi or wherever the hell you want to go to and spend the money, right? The message was very clear. But Shane's right, Frydenberg did say in the budget and reply speech, spend the money, that'd be nice, please, that'd be lovely. But he's a bit push me, pull you with that message though. He has said also, oh, I don't want to tell people what they should do with their money. Which he again did that today. Yeah, both of them. And this has been the problem, right? Because they're sort of doing stimulus without calling it stimulus. Do you think that's part of the reason people aren't spending? I think it, well, I think Shane's point is very good. The difference with the GFC was you got an actual sort of special payment. It was not part of your normal tax return. In itself was special. It's like, well, we've got this new thing that we don't normally get. So let's go spend it. It's not expected. Whereas you do kind of budget for a tax return. You don't know how big it's going to be, but you know, okay, we'll use that for whatever. It's kind of already mentally spent in your head that you're going to do something. So the fact that a tax cut just gets blended into that tax return when it finally comes. So it doesn't in itself seem all that special. You kind of, unless you hit the actual count, you don't know precisely how much more you got than you would have got. It's just, oh, I got a tax return. So I'll do with it what I'll normally do. It's a bit bigger than normal. But also as you're quite right, coupled with that is you've got the treasurer and the prime minister saying, oh, well, if you want to save it, you can save it. It's up to you. That's fine. And also trying to sort of suggest, oh, if you save it now, that's good because you'll spend money later. And that's kind of true, but it means that that spending is very diffused and it's not going to have the stimulatory effect. And that's the whole problem when you've got a government who is frightened of saying the word stimulus because in a sense that admits that the wheels have fallen off and that they are under their watch. And so whereas the Labor Party back in the GFC didn't have that concern, they'd only really just been in power. So they were able to say, hey, emergency break class. They didn't have the luxury either. It was the GFC. Yes, they had to. It was the worst event they've seen since the impression. Whereas this case, there's no falling off a cliff. It's just a long, slow decline that's just... Lemmings in slow. We're just mired in meh. So there's no sort of direction from the government of actually, we need to do anything. And so people aren't going to think that they... Need to do anything. They're going to think, I'll look out for myself, which is save. And that's kind of prudent, but not great for the economy when... Well, you saw it a little bit deeper into that household spending. Discretionary spending actually fell by 0.3% in the quarter. And Friedenberg was pointing out, look, there's been a lift in furnishings. Fantastic. But he didn't point out the fall in hotels, cafes, restaurants, which as a spend is much more important than new carpets and new lounges. And lounge, yeah. And it also... And this is it. You can feed off that in terms of, right, Murph, I can't take you out for a coffee today. I was trying to save some money, right? I feel a bit sad. Hopefully you feel a bit sadder as well. And we didn't even think about Greg just because we can't afford to think about Greg. So you get that. That's where you get into those feelings that are coming through the consumer confidence readings, both the weekly from the ANZ and Westpac's monthly, which given we've just had... We've had three interest rate cuts and Josh Friedenberg's throwing about a thousand bucks at everybody, we should be a happy bunch of little mouse catiers, but we're not. So this sort of leads us to a place in the conversation where I would say something like, so are we at a juncture where the sort of orthodox economic interventions don't work in this environment or... That's a legitimate question I have. That must be really quite something for a treasurer, Josh Friedenberg, a liberal to say, or perhaps all these things that used to work aren't working is a bit of a problem, right? That'd be a big psychological thing to confront if you were him. But I can express that question a bit more simply. What do the figures tell us that the government should do in relation to the economy? Do they give comfort to the, it'll... We're bringing forward infrastructure spending, it'll all be okay, Jack and Jill, don't worry about it. Or does it suggest that more pump priming may be needed? Well, there is an argument that you could go full Trump. I know Guardian listeners might fall off their... Everyone in this podcast just fell off the chair. But the Trumpian approach is I will give tax cuts, like the company tax cuts and the personal income tax cuts that he gave, damn the budget, like he is running a trillion dollar deficit right at the moment. It's the biggest deficits since 2012 when unemployment was about 9%. He's got unemployment down to three and a half, 3.3. So the full Trump is damn the budget consequences. We're just going for it. So I want to grow the economy really, really fast. And the Reserve Bank is saying we need the economy to grow much, much faster if we're going to get unemployment down to four and a half. And once you get down there, then you can see wages growing and everybody will be happy. But the full Trump is not something that can be countenanced by... With the surplus. With more... No, you can't do it with the surplus. You actually have to say, no, stuff it. That's what I mean, screw the surplus. And we're going to say we can afford this because... Yesterday, I think the government sold $300 million worth of debt that won't be paid until 2047 at an interest rate of 1.6%. Like it's... Money is cheap. Money is absolutely cheap. That's... There's the full Trumpian approach. These guys will never go down that path, but there are... There is an alternative out there. But no one darespeak the Trumpian note. What do you think about full Trump? Well, I wouldn't go full Trump in the tax cut way. I'd go full Trump in the let's make use of the 1.6% ability to borrow money for 20 years. I mean, there's a hell of a lot of things we could be building. And spending that money on it. And one of the things these figures showed is that it was government consumption, government sort of just spending money on things, especially the NDIS and the age sector, that was fueling growth, not government investment. Government investment contributed bugger all. In fact, it's kind of been declining over the past year. So their talk of, oh, we're bringing forward all this investment. Well, they better start bringing it forward quicker than it is because it's kind of dried up. And if I was going to pump prime the economy, one, you've actually got to get across that, get out there and spend. Don't be afraid. We've got things under control, which they're certainly good at trying to convince everyone that they've got things under control, but they've done it in such a way that it's almost like, but there's nothing to worry about. And it's like, well, you know, if you want people to spend money, you've got to... Tell them to do it. Tell them to do it a little bit. But also that... Or tell them, sorry, or tell them why it's important to do it. Yeah, well, it's important. But also at the moment, they're still very much on the surplus trumps everything. And if that's how they're going to be, well, then we're going to be where we are. I do have one question. It's the way that they keep talking about drought, not in terms of the economic impact, but the support that they're giving to drought affected communities. And they're talking about it as if it's a stimulus. Now, drought is not like a GFC, which is a financial economic event. It is a climatic event. Yes. Event. And I'm just trying to work out when have we ever talked about drought support... Strap of stimulus. As a type of... We're doing our bit for these drought affected communities, the drought affected economy. I'm just struck a bit weird it is. Never, never in every now... Well, we've lived through a few droughts. The three of us have gone through a fair few. And yeah, I don't think Edmond Barton was talking about the stimulatory impact of the... No. The... The... Federalist. The Federation. Yeah. And I mean, certainly the farm sector hasn't been helping the economy, but the non-farm GDP growth was still just below 2%, well below the 3% sort of long-term average. And actually the impact of the weak farm sector is actually less now than it was six months ago. It's sort of is coming... It's coming back. Well, not coming back. It's just not as... It's not as bad. Big drag on the overall economy. It's like the inventories. Inventories detracted a lot last quarter. And even though inventories were run down this quarter, that wasn't as bad. So the way you measure it means they actually contributed to growth. It's crazy, these statisticians. They just make stuff up. They just... Yes. Well, well, they just... We've got readers who are like, Oh, all right. No, exactly. No, exactly. No, exactly. They'll get another email about it. Exactly. The unemployment... Yeah. Ooh. Yeah. No. Best we don't get it. Sorry, Murph. No. No, let's not open that door. So really, what we need the government to do in myFO, which is shortly, is to change course. They're not going to. But they're not going to. You know that. Well, yes. So nominal GDP actually isn't too bad at the moment. So the budget, the overall budget bottom line right at the moment is still not bad. Although you can see that they've got a few smaller issues around tax collections. But nominal GDP is still pumping along. But they're going to have to make some big corrections that will actually hit the budget bottom line further out, which is longer term growth and wages. They will have an impact in 22, 23 when there's supposed to be tax cuts. And there's a big drop off in the size of the surplus that year because of the impact of that second round of tax cuts. Just putting it out there. Well, yeah. I mean, it's with the chain is right in the nominal GDP growth is still doing well. And that generally is good for taxes and for revenue, which if you were, you know, if I was treasurer, God help us all. But if I was, I'd kind of make use of that and go, well, we don't need a surplus. We can still balance almost probably deliver a balanced budget. You know, we don't now is not the time for a surplus because, you know, growth is 1.7%. They are not going to be. No, but they're not going to be. And there's going to be lots of bringing forward infrastructure, spending, careful planning, everything going. And it's like, well, if this was the plan, well, I'll be worried if they start talking about the aged care packages, a stimulatory. Oh, no. Oh, my God. Well, we haven't fortunately crossed that bridge yet. All right. Let's just in conclusion, what are the we all agree at? We could we could all send Josh Frydenberg, you know, a short missive saying, dear Josh, she'd be good if you could change course and you guys do that regularly and hasn't. I mean, he's not listening. He's not listening. Right. Okay. So let's not even bother. I thought, shall we all just send Josh our best Christmas message? But let's not know. Let's think about it this way. If the government doesn't change course, what are the consequences? The economy is still going to muddle along. It it really will. And this is this is the problem. You've got I always look at this one. The RBA has said we want the economy growing faster. We want unemployment at four and a half percent or lower. So that means we have to run the economy much, much faster. You look at all the forecasts in contained in the budget, which are predicated on what policies they're rolling out. You don't get within a bull's roar. And that's that's the problem right at the moment. We've got two arms to the two key elements of economic policy in this country are they're shuffling off in slightly different directions. Yeah, fundamentally different directions. And you get that's the issue. So the government is making it effectively making a choice. We will let the economy grow at a subdued rate because of our other policy objectives. And you've got Phil Lowe and team saying, oh, for goodness sake, guys, girls, get your get your act together and grow it faster. And and this is why I come back to the Trumpian approach. He made a absolute it's a bold. It's a bold choice cotton to go down the path of stuff. The orthodoxy. I want the economy to grow real fast. And that is a policy message that both sides of politics can agree with. We want to grow much, much faster. But no one's prepared to say actually do the business. Well, to make a trade off, which is to say trade off because we're in the trap. Yeah. Yes. OK. And Greg, what what do you have any fundamental? Yeah, it'll keep muddling through. We won't we're not in danger of recession. Exports will keep us from going backwards. And the government spending on the NDIS will, you know, is not in any danger of stopping soon. Soon and given their timetable, it's got a few more years of ramping up to go. So if there isn't any big significant change in the MIFA, I would expect another interest rate cut next year down to point five percent. And at that point, then we start thinking about unorthodox monetary policy, unconventional methods. And I can see Greg Martin place with a printing press right now. Exactly. And wheelbarrow. Wheelbarrow with the dollars. And, you know, we'll just keep going along, dribbling along, and we'll get to two percent growth, two point two or something. And they'll be wow, things turned. And really, what we'll also be seeing is a lot more downward revisions in our forecasts, in the budget papers and in reserve banks, statements of monetary policy, which has been part of the course for about the last three years. So not a great deal of change. Well, I'm very sorry in this episode that we haven't bought you much sort of advent cheer. We've just sort of had a massive downer. Home, home, home. Now we have a mission. Anyway, but in very erudite fashion, redoubtable fashion, my guests have been superb in explaining the latest bits of the pieces of the economy to you. Thank you, as always. Speaking of superb to our executive producer, Miles Martin Yoni, to Hannah Isard, also for Sterling Services to Production. Don't forget Guardian Australia's Full Story podcast. I know a lot of you guys will have subscribed to that already, and you absolutely must because it's brilliant. Really get behind that. And we will be back with you again next week with more. Home, home. More, home, home, home. Home, home. Thank you for listening.