 This is The Guardian. There hasn't been any discussion at what happens to the Australian economy when you tell 10 million people, oops, your after tax income is going to be $1,500 lower. Hello, lovely people of podcasts and welcome to the show. You are on Australian Politics with Catherine Murphy, the host and the political editor of Guardian Australia and oh boy. Regular listeners of the show will know from the sound of their dulcet tones that we are about to unleash the break of creeps. That's actually really good. Yeah. Oh my God. We should actually be. This is what we should call these chats. I've been looking for a sort of a badge. OK, the bracket creeps. The two bracket creeps with me in the pod cave this week. Shane Wright, of course, from the artist formerly known as Fairfax Media, now nine newspapers, eminent economics senior correspondent. You know, I saw Prince Live talking about the artist formerly known as Great Show, SCG, early 90s. Stop it. One of the best Shane Wright. Purple. Requires no introduction to regulars and Greg Jericho, who these days is more with the Australia Institute and our good selves at the Guardian, but still obviously contributes to the Guardian. And of course, I am back after a bit of a hiatus and I texted the two horsemen of the apocalypse, aka the bracket creeps a day or so ago and said, oh, my God, we need to talk because there are there are many, many complex conditions. I just said, who the hell's this? I heard from a new scientist. Who is this? Sticking to some semblance of order in this podcast. Let me set the scene. Let me set the scene. So we are just over by the time you're listening on Saturday, guys, just over two weeks to the first budget of the Albanese government. I want to start this now. It's the redo budget. Oh, because this is the twenty two, twenty three budget. We've already had the twenty two, twenty three budget. This is and this is how much of a fiscal nerd I am. Yes. This is the first time I was going to save this for insiders, but this is no, no, no, no, no, this is the very first time that there has been a budget, a redone budget of the same fiscal year. Oh, yes, I see. So we have had what, the mini budgets back in the days they would know they were mini budgets, but they were more updated as fiscal outlooks and things. This is a full normal budget, but for the same year, never happened before. Never ever. Never ever. I went looking for this. No, of course you are just a bit sad. But well, no, you do attempt to put facts in your stories. We've had budgets. We've had my e-foes. We've had you e-foes. We've had f-b-o's. U-f-o's. But never a redo. Wow. A mulligan's. For those who play golf, this is a mulligan's. Yeah. Well, I didn't know that anyway. We have this way. This is why we're the bracket creeps. We bring this sort of intellectual heft to the podcast room. We bring these insights. That is true. Yes. OK, so over two weeks, too, as Shane has described, a rather unusual budget. Yes. So that's the first point on our compass. Another point on our compass is the global economy looks... Insert your preferred word, Gents. Sick. Not good. Not good. You've got to go bond it. It has been better. I say scary, but then I'm a well-known e-ore. OK, another point on our compass while we're in the global space, Liz Truss making Boris Johnson look good. And there were some people who said that this may occur, that Liz Truss. Were you one of them? Yes. Because you just have to look at what she'd been talking about for the last decade. Ooh, lovely. Her and quasi. And you go, guys, guys, you're just insane. But what they came up with two weeks ago... Yes, we should explain...is beyond craze. Sorry, yes. It's a bit beyond craze. Why don't you run us through it quickly? Just quickly. Two things, two big things. Energy subsidies that are going to run for two years worth, what is it, about 100 billion quid? Loads of money. A lot of money. Then, which people knew, yep, they're going to do subsidies. They didn't know the cost. Right. Then, oh, hold on, we'll do something else. We'll cut the top tax rate. Yes. 45 pence down to 40 at a cost of 60 billion quid. And financial markets went... Really? Excuse me. What the hell? Excuse me. I had... I was looking at a note from some UBS economists based in England, and they were pointing out that the amount of borrowing that quasi and Liz have to do over the next two years to have paid for all of this... Now, they've ditched the tax cuts, but to pay for this was the equivalent of everything the British government has borrowed over the last 54 years. This is why the price on British debt, gilts, went through the roof because the financial markets went, hold on, you can't sell that much debt and get away with it too lightly. If you're the US, you can. They actually hit a new record this week. 31 trillion US in debt. Yay, they're going well. The actual... I think I've seen that the interest cost on their debt. The US will surpass their health spending, the federal health spending by the end of the decade, but that's another story. But if you're the US, you're the reserve currency in the world, you can get away with it. We're not talking rural Britannia world, like this is... Or even Brexit world. No, this is... This is Britain on your own chaps world. Yeah, Britain's a little island nation that wants some bankers and I don't know what else, some nice cheese. And they import about half of everything they consume. Everything they consume, whether it's for consumers or to make things half of their economy. And workers as well, which they've just discovered today. They're not importing this debt as they used to. Amazing. And it'd be very, very super nerdy technical. The price of the gilts actually went down. The interest rate went up. Yes. I was really confused, but all those who study second year commerce would just like to... Yeah, but you'd see that gone. We love the bottom line. Yeah, basically, yeah, the interest rate that the UK government was paying on its debt just suddenly went... And the value of the pound went to hell. And the added bonus was almost destroying the pension system. Yes. Just as an extra bonus. All in all, not a good way. Not good. So I don't know, I presume at least some of you saw that without the explanation, but anyway you're fully across it now. Shall we say, I mean, how do you even describe that? I mean... There are words, but you can't... It was basically the case of people actually thinking and actually delivering on a trickle down economics rather than just sort of saying it in words and realizing that it'd be far too silly to actually implement, but they actually implemented it and... I was shocked that everyone went like, what? And also, I mean, the thing that just sort of struck me at a political level was, Least Trust obviously focused a great deal on winning the leadership ballot in order to be the new Prime Minister of Great Britain as you would, because obviously, if you don't focus on the ballot, you're not the Prime Minister. And I gather one of her sort of key pitches was, I am that person. I am the low tax, high gross. But she never articulated this position. Oh, no, no, no, I know, love. That was the special thing. I know, but she gets elected basically on that platform. Then she implements a set of policies replicating the platform and it wasn't just the financial markets, the IMF. It was the Tory party. You took one look at it and went, oh my God, are you serious? Absolutely not. I thought one of the best things I saw was from an economist who actually helped design the committee that's inside the Bank of England that says interest rates. And he was talking about this increase in interest rates on British debt. And he said, this is the more more on risk premium. If you do if you introduce moronic policy, this is the increase in the price of debt that you pay for being a moron. I loved it. The moron moron risk premium. Well, we've got to use that somewhere. No, no, I just thought, no, well, I just think moron is actually a wonderful segue to stage three tax cuts. Oh, come on. Anyway, that's another point on our compass, Greg. A couple of weeks shy of the budget. The treasurer, well, actually, I think it was really three weeks prior to the budget. It was last week, really. I noticed the treasurer's language had changed because I had been away in my cupboard writing and came back and looked at transcripts of what the treasurer had been saying and went, okay, that's a bit different than. Let's have a discussion. Let's have a discussion. Okay, so the stage three tax cuts were there and we'll delve into that in a bit more. But I'm just still sort of like identifying all the points on the compass. So we've done global economy scary. We've done Liz Truss. Oh, my God. What words? We've done budget coming. We've done stage three. And the final one, the inflation dragon. Rawr. Is the inflation. My raw was just not there. Not even the people who created Godzilla in the 1960s would be that poor. Possibly insert sound effect. Anyway, the reason I'm asking my erstwhile colleagues whether or not the inflation dragon has been slain is because the Reserve Bank seems to have moderated the jacking up interest rate cycle. Or what is it about this that I don't get, Chaps? Well, if we're going to talk about inflation dragons, I think we need to actually go back to the global awfulness because Sore is actually doing okay compared to America, compared to the UK, definitely. And that's having an impact here not only because we import a lot of stuff and oil and all manner of other resources and things that are made with our own resources. But when you see people like the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England raising interest rates and especially the US Federal Reserve, kind of the RBA and every other central government around the world has to follow a little bit. Otherwise, what will happen is investors will go, oh, American money is where I want to be now because I can get a good interest rate and the value of our dollar will go down, which makes things worse for inflation and because things become more expensive when we buy them from overseas. Which is a really complicated way of saying the Reserve Bank, even if it feels like inflation, it's getting on top of inflation in Australia, which isn't really, had to keep interest rates going up a little bit, even if it only did a 25 basis point, purely because if it didn't, it would have seen the value of our dollar go down fairly sharply. And that would have made their problem even worse because the price of imported goods would have gone up. And it would have been worse if not for there's some early figures out of the US showing that perhaps businesses are employing as many people as they were. So share markets in the US. You beauty the Fed might stop with your interest rate. So that actually had a real, that actually filtered through, I think the last couple of days we've seen like a four or 5% increase in the value of the Australian share market, which is tied to this, oh right, the Fed, they might be getting their dragon under control, AKA, who knows where it will end? There is this big fear, I think the latest is that it's a one in four chance the US will be in recession. Well, there's bits and pieces I've been reading suggested it's already in a shallow recession. No, no, no, the employment over there is doing quite well. It's just too strong still. UK is 75% chance of recession. Which they are really close. The Governor of the Bank of England basically said, we probably really are there. And with Shane talking about the stock market, it's a good reminder to realise why these things go up and down. And it's not because Australian investors are coming, oh, Australian share companies are producing great stuff. It's just that, oh, maybe the bond market isn't as good as we thought it might be, so we'll invest into shares. Generally when interest rates are going up, that's bad for the stock market. So when interest rates are falling, the stock, that's where you put your money in stocks and shares because you think you'll get a better return there. So it's really, it's one of those things where you can't just, when you see after the sport and they go, oh, the ASX 200 went up, what a percent. It doesn't always mean, oh, Australia is doing great or America is doing great. It could be that some things aren't going great or they're not going as bad as we thought they were going to go and things like that. Okay. So we've identified bits and pieces. I think we've well and truly, I mean, poor Liz Truss may not recover if she ever listens to this episode when she hears the excoriation. I'm sure Liz will be listening in. Delivered. Well, you'd be surprised. You'd be surprised, Shane, right? Who listens to this podcast as you learn recently. I did, my accountant. There you go. We want to say hi. Thank you, Jason. Send her the pod. Hello to Shane's accountant. He was impressed, one with my Star Wars, uh, and that, yes, he listens to the, um, the Catherine Murphy podcast. I'm thinking there must be a, there is there a Venn diagram of Star Wars fans, accountants and Catherine Murphy fans. Well, is he Gen X like us? Yeah. Yeah. No, I think he's getting closer to, uh, he's a bit younger, a little bit younger. Has there ever been a podcast where we haven't raised the issue of Gen X? I don't think so. No, no. And they will never. We are the oppressed. We are the oppressed. The minority and the oppressed. I mean, I'm sorry. So they will, sorry. The millennials are looking, they've given up blaming. Millennials don't have to worry about interest rates because they're never going to buy out of the 40-mile. I keep saying that to some of the millennials. And the millennials, we're the ones who are paying the boomers that have already paid it off. Yeah. So millennials, and they're tired of going, okay, boomer. Then they go, okay, Gen X. Exactly. Yeah, we don't care. Come on. We had new wave. We had punk. Exactly. And we've been blind or ignored all our lives. So, you know, there it is. This is a little space. This is like a little safe zone for Gen X and, and lovers of Gen X everywhere. Okay. So we've done, we've done enough on Liz Truss. That's right. I think, look, the budget will inevitably inevitably bring us back to the global economy, I think, in some shape or form when we start to throw that around. So let's, let's go back to the budget quite close now. Before we get to stage three, and this is the intriguing conversation that's sort of like the entree for this budget season. Let's just talk about the budget generally. Shane, you said, obviously it's an extraordinary event because of the, you know. It's never happened before. Never happened before. The definition of extraordinary. Exactly. Right. What in general terms do we, what do we think the story or the picture will be from this budget? What do we think? Right. I think you'll see the whole, right, we've got to get the house in order. So you will see Raughtson based audit. We'll see a little bit of that. We'll see a bit of the reframing of some of the dodgy car parks and roundabouts that were promised by the previous bunch. There'll be the real image of the global economy. Yes. Jim Chalmers has been sounding like the ancient mariner at the moment, like recently by, there's always these storm clouds and he's still sailing before them. Phil Lowe's talking about an evil, evil keel, an even keel. So the Reserve Bank Governor, he's in the boat as well, trying to keep everything steady. Saddle down, Jim. So you've got that aspect of it. Meeting the election promises. Yes. Perhaps one, but anyway, we'll return. No, they won't change stage three in this budget. Yeah. I wonder too whether they're setting this up for May. Well, not quite. It is because remember, where will Jim Chalmers be next week? Yeah, in the US. In the US. But they don't close off the books. Sorry, guys. Let us just focus on ourselves. Oh, we're segueing. Yes, I mean, because we were approaching stage three, but we've got there because actually it is really fascinating and there's lots to talk about with it. They closed the books about a week before. I mean, I realised that this is a highly unusual, you know the RAF guys, if you've ever been in the Challenger, they have this thing called the performance take off. Yes. Right? Where they just basically take the bird way up at a very steep gradient. It's a pretty unusual budget to see a treasurer just sort of like three weeks out say, oh, by the way, we might do this big thing scheduled for the out years. It is, I understand exactly what you're saying, it's very late in the pace. And you think to yourself. He hasn't tilled the ground. Can he do this? Ground untilled. Yes, ground, look, I sort of agree. What are those strange things you're making out of this? Exactly. I mean, when we did this last pod, what, four months ago? Very long ago. I sort of jokingly sort of said they should dump the stage and you guys run. That's locked in dead. It's amazing how quickly the ground has shifted on this thing. And I agree, they haven't been out there doing much, but a lot of others are. And to the point where maybe, you know, yeah, maybe you rip off the band aid. I don't know. But your vote doesn't count inside cabinet. And that's where this is decided. Oh, I realized that and I realized that, but no one in there likes it. No one in the cabinet likes it. The only thing they are worried about is the broken promise aspect. And there's already a number who are sort of doing the well, let's keep our good promises and break the bad promises. It's not really even our thing. As I say, I think it's gone really, it's amazing how quickly this has shifted. I thought after the election, no, the wedded to it, they didn't even give themselves any wriggle room. And it's amazing how there's just been a lot of wriggling sort of going on, perhaps on the outside that has shaken them up on the inside to start throwing metaphors and mixing them all around. But I agree, it's probably more likely to do it in May. But which is the advantage of having two budgets in six, seven months. I just think it's, I can't see it actually coming into place. Like I can't see the tax cuts actually going through in the form that they currently are legislated. Which is different to some of those who say, get rid of them all. Yeah, no, no, I still think there will be a stage three tax cut. In fact, I think that'd be silly not to have a stage three tax cut. It just won't and shouldn't be the stage three tax cut that we have in place. I mean, to put on my political hat rather than economics, because I think the economics is pretty obvious. You don't give money to people who don't need it. Is that if they were to change the stage three tax cut, let's say even they drop the 30% marginal tax rate down, but for everyone earning over under 120,000, then they're left with the opposition having to argue, oh, but what about the people on 160,000? You know, and it's like, well, okay, you can have that. You can argue that. I know. We're going to pay for whatever we go to use that save money. I still think it is a problem. We have the 180,000, the top for the start of the 45 has been there since 08. That's a long time for the top marginal tax rate, that top cut in. I go to Ken Henry because I was rereading the Henry tax paper and he had a three rate tax system that he proposed. If you allowed for inflation, he had 180,000 in 2010. You take that. That is at now $200,000, $210,000 because he could see as someone in that space that the top rate because you, and I think it's Rod Sims who this week touched on it. If you don't start changing the top rate, the increase in people who go to avoid their tax really escalates. This is the problem that they had in the 70s. We saw it and we've seen it even now. You can go looking through the tax scales and you see all these people and it's extraordinary. The number of people who managed to get their tax just under each threshold. No offense to my accountant, who's a great fan of the show as we've talked, but it's great business for accountants. It's a waste of time for the economic, the dead weight loss around accountancy and around tax minimization and tax change. I think it's too easy to say, oh, people have 180,000, they deserve a tax cut. I think the threshold has to change. I think that's easy enough. You raise the threshold up to 200,000. Which is part of stage three. The problem is dropping it from 45 to 30. That's exactly what I'm saying. The part they dump. They can keep that in for people earning under 120,000. I might even have a bit of an issue with that. You don't go from 45 to 30 for people earning over 130,000, 180,000. You just raise that up to 200,000. If you're really generous, go a bit higher. If you want to worry about that aspect, but then you're still... The big problem is that all the benefits are going to those essentially over 120,000. All the arguments that are saying in favor of things like correcting for bracket creep and things like that, well, bracket creep affects mostly those earning under 120,000. If you're worried about bracket creep, the stage three tax cuts are a terrible way to go about it. Well, I'm glad you brought up bracket creep. I'm looking at the Permatory Budget Office did some analysis in this very space, which I think is... So, remember the whole thing about it. This will solve bracket creep. It was never going to do that. Just hit pause for a tick because they're... Speaking of younger people listening to the podcast. What is bracket creep? Yeah. I know there are a number of young folks who listen and we love you dearly. Just very quickly, the stage three tax cut package, if you've missed it, this was implemented by the Morrison government. The Labor Party supported it in opposition after an internal discussion and the Labor Party has thus far said, we will deliver a tax package brackets that we never liked very much, but that's been the story to date. Now, Jim Chalmers is resetting that discussion somewhat. Now, just in summary, what we've been saying is that this package predominantly does benefit higher income earners. One of the reasons that's put in the general discourse for why we need this bit of tax reform is a concept known as bracket creep, which Shane will explain for you. So, bracket creep, and this... For the politicians who are listening, bracket creep is two different things. It is not just one, which a lot of people get mixed up. There's two aspects. Bracket creep is one of those things. If you've got a wage increase and good luck to you, and that wage increase pushes you into a higher tax bracket. So, you go from paying 19 cents in the dollar to 32 and a half cents in the dollar, which is what happens. That is one example of bracket creep. The other is inside the tax brackets themselves. So, if I'm earning, let's say, the 32 and a half cuts in at... 45. 45. 45. And I get a really big increase. I changed job. I became Catherine Murphy. And so, I go to 70,000 because Murph's underpaid. You've got no idea. I know. How underpaid Murph is. So, the $25,000 that's inside the 32 and a half percent tax bracket is taxed. Your average tax rate is going up because more and more of your income is being taxed at a higher rate. Yes. Beautifully explained. Bracket creep. Yes. And when this was announced, Josh Frydenberg said, this will end bracket creep. Indeed he did. Optimistic fellow, that is. Problem was he was wrong. And that's because people move... Because the bracket they're creating is from $45,000 to $200,000. So, people... The average tax rate will go up because there is just one... No matter what you do, you end up in that space. So, the parliamentary budget office, independent budget that they did, pointed out that the own... That even with this tax, these huge tax cuts, you're going to still have to fix the tax system in the next eight years. And they pointed out the only people who have a lower average tax rate by the end of the decade are those earning between $96,000 and $160,000. Yeah. So, it did solve that problem. But the only problem is they're only 13% of the workforce. Yes. So, everyone... People earning between $20,000 and $50,000, and there's only a small proportion of those who get into one of the changes, that's 30% of workers. They face a 6.6 percentage point increase in their average tax rate by the end of the decade. People earning between $50,000 and $70,000, 3 percentage point. Even the very top... The top 1%, they actually face an increase in their average tax rate, and everyone earning between $70,000 and $96,000 will. And that's where the great bulk of people are. Yes. So, people... Particularly those who say, we don't... We have to get rid of the whole stage, three tax cuts, are consigning not just high income earners to paying more tax, they're consigning every person in. Yeah, everybody. And this is why I think you've got to... You get to your point. You get to your design, stage three. You have to redesign. You call it stage three. I mean, to be honest, most people... And I'm sort of projecting here a bit, but most people are not going to really be across all the ins and outs of stage three tax cuts, because why would you? I always have to go back and reread just to remember what numbers are going up and down. Every budget. Oh my God. Yes. And I write about the thing every week. So, how bad it is that I have to check. So, if you're still... If a government obviously needs tax cuts, and this has been a key point that Richard Dennis who's based on my boss at the Australia Institute has been pointing out, the tax cuts are due to come in basically in the run up to the next election. Now, if they keep with them as they are, essentially, Labour is going to the next election with a big high end tax cut, and it's going to be a case of, well, what are you doing for the lower middle come in, as who are facing this increased average rate of taxation? What have you done? Can I come to something else which has been completely forgotten, and by the time this goes to air, we will have reported this, is the Lamington. Yes. Now, explain that for a young class. The low and middle income tax offset, which was introduced by Morrison in the 2018 budget and was supposed to end two years ago. Yes. But has continued on, continued on, and it's now worth $1,500. So let me put it this way. A person on $90,000 this financial year is facing the biggest increase in their tax since the introduction of the Medicare levy in 1984. There are about 5 million people earning between 60,000. So 60,000 is below the average income, way below the medium income, way below the average. Everyone earning between 60K and $125,999 is going to get a tax increase. So the person on 90,000 at the moment, after tax, which is the most important thing for most people, how much do you take home? They get $69,983. With the death of the Lamington, it goes down to $6,343. So to sort of summarise quickly. That is coming. That is happening right now. And I get angry because there are some people say this was always temporary, which it was, but it was a dumb decision to make it temporary. It affects 10.2 million people. And there hasn't been any discussion at what happens to the Australian economy when you tell 10 million people, oops, your after tax income is going to be $1,500 lower. Yeah. I mean, it was meant to be temporary because they were going to take it out at the same time they were going to deliver a tax cut and it was all going to cancel out. So you didn't get it down. It never really did either. And then they, because of the pandemic, they brought the tax cuts forward and kept the Lamington and then it was like, and I can remember as soon as they did, I'm like, hang on. If they get rid of this next year, there's going to be a whacking big tax cut. They can't do that in the run up to an election. They didn't, but both sides went to the election going, oh yeah, let's not talk about this because we both want to take that money. Having talked to both the then shadow and then treasurer, they were both absolutely aware of this. Yes. Absolutely aware of it, but it was the love that Dear Not Speak Its Name. It's the tax that Dear Not Speak Its Name. The tax increase. Or the tax break in this point. So you get to this point, okay, we're going to reduce your taxable, your take home pay. And we've got some people saying, well, you don't even deserve a tax cut the two years after that. Like that is, like we've got into it. Like there was a reason why there's been so much debate about the tax. There needs to be a tax debate in this country because we're in such a bad position on tax. Well, that's beautiful, beautiful landing because that's sort of, that's the point, isn't it? Because of what we think in terms of the budget in two weeks time, what you're saying, Shane, I think is there's a much bigger job to do here and you can't just sort of deal with stage three in isolation. Therefore, if you're the treasurer and you literally, well, if they close the books about a week out, which is what tends to happen, he's literally got to execute this in 10 days. While he's overseas. In the US, which is tricky, tricky, not impossible, but tricky. So Shane thinks it'll be more likely May. I think it, I think weirdly, we still might see something in October, although I'm not certain about that. I think in the minds of some in the government, this is an October or May proposition that we're sort of setting up now. And also, I mean, it's a test, isn't it, for the new government? I mean, because obviously, people like us who value accountability and want politicians to do what they say, we'll be talking a lot about election promises over the next little bit whether or not they're kept or not. But really, the challenge before the government, isn't it, Greg, is that they have got to actually start making a bigger case to look at these things more holistically. And then that involves a whole potentially a new election cycle and a new mandate when you're sort of setting up these sort of broader reform. And the budget as well is it's going to be very interesting to see what numbers they come up with on the revenue side. And because we saw with the 21, 22 budget, massive, you know, reduction in the deficit as as expected due to basically Russia invading Ukraine, helped resources prices go through the roof and lifted revenue. But it's not something you can bank on, perhaps a... Well, they won't. They'll get that revised. So I know. Yeah, exactly. They'll come back to it. It'll be $55 a ton. So it's this weird situation where, in a sense, the probably the budget balance is going to get worse because we've had this one off weirdness this year and that's going to be a tricky political sell even because the old, that was an abnormal one off thing, probably is hard to explain. But fortunately, the way budgets are framed now in terms of their factoring in prices of the dollar and oil and etc. are pretty conservative now. And you'd want to be very conservative now because looking across the oceans, there's not a lot of joy to be held. Back to the scary. Back to the scary. Do you love scary? Well, America's doing OK. Let's be honest. America's doing OK. But there's a lot of people over there getting fairly antsy about whether the Federal Reserve has gone too hard with raising interest rates because it has raised interest rates faster than we have even and often recessions come after doing that. And if America goes into recession, yeah, we've got China. But China's got its own problems. China's got its own problems. Well, that's why Europe's got its problems. It would be impossible almost for us to avoid it. Let me put this in your mind there. So I've seen the very first bank to do an estimate on this budget says we think it'll be a deficit of 50 billion. And that's predicated on all those things that Greg has just carefully explained. But it also includes the assumption about commodity prices and an assumption around inflation. Inflation is good for budgets. Always has been. Ask Ben Chifley and Harold Holt. Yeah. Like they inflated away the debts of World War II. Fantastic. So inflation and we haven't seen this for a very long time, inflation helping a budget. The other thing is we go about, say, the price of iron ore. They will revert back again as they always have to this forecast $55 a ton. So headline budget deficit, let's say it's 50 billion for this. We get to May. Now, if things just rumble on rather than falling off a cliff, they will have to revise down that deficit by a substantial amount. Then we get to the final budget outcome in September next year. You could be down to let's say the smallest deficit Swan had was about 18 billion, which is the one that he was trying to get to surplus and never got to. He got an 18 billion deficit. There is a way that you can see that, but it is, of course, predicated on the central banks of the world, not driving the world into recession. Yeah, which brings us back to scary, which is a bad note to end on. But sadly, that is our time. So we are going to have to end on it. I will get the bracket creeps, aka the two horsemen of the apocalypse. Expecting a t-shirt or something. Yeah, definitely. No, I'm not wearing a t-shirt, bracket creeps around Canberra. It's got to be all that. No, I like it. I like it. I expect to see merch. Fifth full horsemen of the apocalypse. Friends of the pod, I expect to see merch. No, obviously, we'll get through the budget, which is on the 24th, isn't it? 25th, my friend. 25th. Forgive me. 25th of October, we will get through the budget and obviously all our coverage and then I'll get the chaps back reasonably soon after the budget and we can stare at the entrails and workouts. Explain how we went wrong. The budget figures were actually wrong. Which I saw that headline somewhere this week about the RBA. Oh my God. Yes, we will scrub all of our mistakes. Anyway, Shane, Greg, I love you both. Thank you again for your time. I think actually, I'll just say this parenthetically, I think this is actually the fewest thing that we've ever seen. Just musical references that we've done in any episode. I was just thinking, and given we've just had the summer of Kate. I know. I know. It's a failure. Anyway, we'll more than make up for that in the next session. Thank you to Alison Chan, who is producing this week. Thank you to you guys for listening and again, a hearty hello to Shane's accountant and all other regular listeners and friends of the pod. We will be back with you next week.