 Look, it all starts to fall apart if your message isn't resonating. We weren't asking the first order questions about strategy. We weren't then enlisting our research efforts around it. And we didn't see the big shift in the strategic sort of framework that occurred with Morrison shrinking the battlefield to just being this fight between Bill and him. Well hello good people of pods and welcome to the show. It's Catherine Murphy and with me this week is Jay Weatherill. Hello. In the studio. Jay, in case you've not been following the news this week, has done with his colleague, first world federal colleague Craig Emerson, done a review of the, well I'll just say, I've already said it so I can't offend Jay by saying in front of him, the Hindenburg that was Labor's election campaign in May and down to the fine print. So we're going to talk about that in this conversation for the next little bit and try and get behind some of the very interesting ideas that have been floated in the review. So welcome Jay. Thank you for making the time. Pleasure. Now I'm just going to start with the easiest question of all. Why did voters not trust Bill Shorten? Well we say that the effect of the electoral result was really a combination of factors. I don't think you can separate out one factor. We say that Bill's popularity or lack of it was a contributing factor to the loss but it really needs to be understood in the context of a lack of a coherent strategy which really framed up the contest in an appropriate way. I mean at a fundamental level it was odd for the party to really invite an evaluation almost entirely of itself without there being really a clear evaluation of the government. I mean that's typically how election campaigns are run. The opposition runs an evaluation of the government. So at that fundamental strategic level there was an issue there and then there was, and sitting underneath that, there was not really a persuasive narrative but rather a shopping list of policies. It's then when you understand the relationship with the leader because all those things exposed the leader who's sitting in front of 250 costed policies with this really sort of an incredibly high trust agenda but with a leader around whom there are some doubts. You see how those two things come together. A different campaign could have protected a leader where there were some vulnerabilities. Sure and I promise you we're not going to spend the next 20 minutes talking about personality intrigues or invite the next 100 year war within the federal Labour Party but this is a basic question. The review says of Shorten obviously that he is one factor in Labour's election loss. We will get to the other factors, I promise you. But the question I've got is very sincere. There was data over a long period of time, public data, over a long period of time that indicated that for whatever reason, fairly or unfairly, voters did not trust Bill Shorten. I'm not going to talk about being popular because that doesn't matter. It's whether or not a leader is trusted is actually the metric. We looked at, I suppose we looked at a series of things. There was the context of Labour's history, so the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd issues and Bill Shorten did have a role there and that no doubt is part of the evaluation of him. The public evaluation. The public evaluation of him. And then of course there's the six years of being leader of the opposition. I mean inevitably you're at the pointy end of the attack on the government and they focused all of their energies and attacks on him. I think really powerfully in the election campaign itself. One of the things that I think probably changed for me in the course of the review was my evaluation of the impact of the social media campaign, in particular the one funded by Clive Palmer. There was $60 million tipped into the last two weeks and it was all directed at Shorten and damaging his standing. That's all true but you can't, I don't think in advertising, you can't make fetch happen. You can't create something completely out of the blue. Advertising works when it plays to a predisposition on the part of the consumer or the buyer or whomever. We all have our strengths and weaknesses and if enough time and effort is focused on any one of us, I'm sure we could create doubts. I think it's the interaction between those things and you can't underestimate the power of the expansive policy agenda. You look at 2016, Bill and much of the view about him probably had been established by 2016. A different campaign is constructed in a different way which didn't have Bill in the breeze. There was no barrier to 14 extra seats coming over the line in our favour. I just don't think it's difficult to compartmentalise the consideration of the leadership in a way which I think gets you to the proper analysis. Yeah, I accept that. I think it is multi-factorial but still there must have been and there were times I know because obviously I talk to these people all the time. There were times where Labour people asked themselves whether or not, pre-election, whether or not Shorten was too substantial a barrier to entry for them. Yeah, but we chose. We chose and I think the unity around his leadership was not fake. I think it was real. While there was talk of leadership tensions, they weren't substantial. I'm sure it occurred to people and there were random conversations from time to time but there was no serious discussion of changing the leadership. What I think there was and probably this was a hangover of this old trauma of the Radgillart Radiran. I'm sorry I was going to ask you actually. Yeah, was perhaps a lack of a critical evaluation of the leadership which was a different question. That's not with a means to changing, with a view to changing it but rather what can we do to address some of the issues. One of the things we did find is that there were a few pretty desultory attempts to lift Bill's standing but they... What were those? Just small media campaigns that ran for a short period of time that sought to raise his positive standing and place him in a more positive context. One of the things that kept happening is that it kept being these miscellaneous catastrophes for the government. There'd be the Section 44 issues, the by-elections, the leadership changes. Every time when Labour started to think about trying to lift Bill Shorten's standing, there'd be some fresh catastrophe for the government which meant that it seemed like less of a priority and less of a concern. It seemed that... The built-in assumption is that we're... We're going to win anyway. We're going to win anyway so it doesn't matter. Okay, well then let's, as I promised you, not dwell on personalities for the entire thing. Why was the campaign so out of control? This is a question that I think also can be sheeded back to the expectations. Parley probably a misreading of the 2016 election result. 2016 gave us some false confidence, I think, about a range of things, about our leader, about our policies, and about our campaign organization, all of which look pretty good. There was no real impetus to review... I mean, if you're winning, why change a winning game? Then the news polls... But you did, but you didn't win. Well, true. That's the first mistake. I mean, a loss is a loss, and yet it was acted upon as though it was a victory. But then pretty quickly after that, the news poll had us, had catapulted us into a winning position and kept us there. No, no, no, no. Absolutely. There was so much... Once again, why would you... Your structure is a new strategy to the extent that it existed. You might not know what you're doing, but whatever it is, it seems to be working type of thing. But it's weird to me, Jay, because obviously we all... After 2016, when the Labor campaign picked up... How many seats was it? Fourteen. Fourteen seats, right. We all, me included, delved right into Labor's ground game, digital strategy. Which was superior, I think. Exactly. I made a point, journalistically, of studying it. Yes. I'll tell you what, so did the Liberal Party. Yes. Right. So I can't reconcile, unless I was being fed total bullshit, to be frank, after the 2013 election about... I mean, no one was saying we're masters of the universe, but there was a pretty comprehensive picture painted of a very effective ground operation. I think, well, ground operation worked well. Yes. And continue to work well on this campaign. In fact, we enhanced it. It actually... It's a definitional issue, but I'm separating out the social media thing from the ground game, the ground game, direct voter contact, all of that sort of thing. Was even bigger and better this time. Yeah. Just that you've got the wrong message. Of course, it doesn't work. But the social media thing, there is no doubt we went backwards. Now, having said that, we spent more, but that there were material parts of the social media campaign that were inferior to even 216, which is troubling. But certainly, so not only do we go backwards compared with 216, the lips went forward. Yes. And actually catapulted into a new, whole new world. And so the gap was substantial. But having said that, we gave them material to work with, in much the same way as the liberals created the circumstances for Mediskit, we created the circumstances for... Yeah, played the ground for the death tax. For the death tax, even though it's obviously... It's complete bullshit. It is complete bullshit. But there was this grain of truth to it that... And we didn't have an effective way of responding to it. No, well that's... Yeah. And again, some of my reporting, I've gone into that quite substantially in terms of, despite best efforts trying to escalate concerns within Facebook, that didn't happen. And that's a whole other issue for democracy that we've all got to come to terms with. Well, we do make recommendations around that, about Palmer's money and about lies. We talk about spending caps and truth in advertising legislation. They're the only two respects where we suggest policy changes. I think they're important. But again, it's sort of like I am struggling to reconcile a machine which is firing across the board in the previous campaign versus the campaign that you describe in this review, which is extraordinary. No campaign committee. Things being cooked up in the last couple of weeks of the election campaign, like Keystone Cops. It's sort of... I can tell you, can I share with you my experience obviously because I interacted with the leaders party on the road, right? I went up and did a substantial interview with Bill Shorten probably two and a half weeks in. And it felt at the time, I'm not saying that it felt out of control, it didn't, but it felt materially different in terms of the disposition and attitude and everything else. I couldn't put my finger on at the time. Well, things were going pretty bad by then. That's the thing. But see, when you don't have a message, look, it all starts to fall apart if your message isn't resonating. I mean, if you're out there with a plan, I mean, the idea of having to reconstruct your central message halfway through an election campaign is catastrophic. So everyone's going to feel a bit all at sea. So if you don't... I mean, we weren't asking the first order questions about strategy. We weren't then enlisting our research efforts around it. And we didn't see the big shift in the strategic sort of framework that occurred with Morrison shrinking the battlefield to just being this fight between Bill and him. That was a profound change in the strategic environment that we didn't clock, we didn't understand. And I don't want to convey in this conversation, I want to be self-aware in this conversation. It's not like we, brilliant with the wisdom of hindsight folks out here in journalism land saw this coming. I was the same. I thought it was all going swimmingly. It all looked to be going, I believe, the news polls. Yeah, but this is... I still can't... Is the straight answer to the question, what's the difference between the machine and the two campaigns complacency? Is that the answer? Well, complacency, but look, I think capability as well. I mean, there is no doubt that we didn't have the structures or the capability and we didn't marshal the resources necessary to construct the appropriate strategy. So who bears responsibility for that? Everyone, the national executive, the leadership group, the leader, the party's secretary. I mean, everyone plays a role in that. I mean, it's not... There was a lot of self-sense... There were people raising some alarm bells, but there was a lot of self-censorship. Yeah, I want to get into this. Yeah. How do people do that? Self-censored. Yeah. Because they... A lot of journalists did as well. This doesn't feel right. We think this is not really heading the right direction, but what do I know? There's a news poll and everyone else is... The whole world is conducting themselves as though Labor's going to win. Perhaps I'm wrong. I think there was a... So people would raise things, but when they were rebutted, because the people that had set the direction were obviously defensive of the direction. Now we're told, don't panic. This is one of the dilemmas of strategy, and one of the things you're taught is that you've got to hold the line. You can't shift the position, because starting and shifting and changing is there. Yes, it's death. Self-description. And so that's okay, I suppose, if you've... Because look, this is not... This is an art. There's no one scientific answer. There's probably more than one pathway to victory. The critical thing is choosing one and sticking with it. And so this is the received wisdom, if you like, of political strategists. You actually have to stick to your position. Now that's fine if the position has been formulated through a proper process and has been informed by research. What we now know is that we're really working off old thinking, which essentially thinking that was better suited to the Turnbull government and not the repositioned Morrison government. But in terms of culture, going back to that visit I made to the campaign about two and a half weeks in with Shorten, it felt a bit off. I did say to him at the time, I don't think you've got this. Right? I said to him, it has struck me over a long period of time with this generation of the Labour Party in Canberra, both through the Rudd-Gillard period and through the Shorten period, that people lack the confidence to be frank with one another. Well, partly... I mean, they'll kill each other in broad daylight, but they won't actually say, listen, mate, I think that's a crock or... Well I think there was, we're seeing a bit of the blowback of the, as we say, the Rudd-Gillard Rudd era, where there was such a traumatic experience where disunity was, it was sort of seen as the cause of the catastrophic loss in 2013. And so anything that looked like disunity, so even a critical, anything critical of the direction that leadership had chosen was put into that same category of disunity, and you couldn't do that anymore. So that's pretty unhealthy. And we do talk about that culture in the report, and we say that there should be... Every piece of information is a data point that's worthy of examination. Every federal MP, every one of your MPs in your caucus is a living, walking, talking focus group. They're seeing people every day, and they've got to be respected. And whereas what we were doing, we were dismissing things, that was noise, because it wasn't fitting in with our mindset, because we're going to win. And the polling was right. Right. Well, it wasn't far wrong. I mean, our internal polling was much closer. Yeah, the internal polling is what I'm thinking about. Half of the 36 weeks that the track ran, you can see we weren't going to win. And what was the focus group stuff? Oh, the focus groups were even more alarming. Like what? Oh, that basically our messages... First our message wasn't cutting through, so this idea of cuts just wasn't resonating, because the government had effectively inoculated that with their budget. And really, the cuts message started to lose its potency once the government had dropped its corporate tax cut as well. And so, because whatever concern there were about cuts was even more egregious in the context of you throwing money at, to coin a phrase, the big end of town. And so once that was dropped, the cuts message seemed to fade, especially when the budget came down. And not only did it reverse a number of cuts, but seemed to actually even have some new spending. And that the era of cutting was over. And I think also critically important is that the cuts hung very deeply on someone like Malcolm Turnbull, Mr. Harbour for slight mention. And less so on somebody like Scott. On Mr. Everyman. Mr. Everyman. So we'd set the campaign up as being, that was one of our frames. We had our big sort of spending promises and they had their cuts. So that disappeared. And then there were doubts, and then of course what was coming through were ruled out about our tax agenda and the fear that that was creating. So this was the worrying information that was coming through the focus groups. Yeah, but obviously you had the false positives of by-elections and other things to override it. Again, I don't want to ask to sound in this conversation, particularly me in this conversation, to hold myself up as some sage who saw this all along. No, we were all on the same boat, well certainly inside the Labour Party. And you've got to also remember there was all these captains of industry sort of bending a path to the door of all these shadow ministers and saying, oh, in a couple of weeks time we'll have you over to our office and show you around and we'll talk about. Well everyone thought, everyone really thought, I think, apart from Scott Morrison. Yeah, well, and he's the one guy where it counted. And possibly Andrew Hearst, I don't know, but certainly Scott Morrison thought he would win but that was his. Well, these leaders, I can tell you that they do have an irrational self-belief and it's quite useful that they do. Oh, I was going to say yes. You go to declare you're interested, you just did. Anyway, that's fine. Let's get into the broader territory that you pitch in the review, which I'm quite interested in. I wrote a piece about it after the review was published, the central challenge of the term, which is, it's a funny old thing because you sort of, at one level you're saying Labour's got to learn to walk all sides of the street, got to be able to communicate with everybody, but you've got to bring it together in a way that brings the country together. And by that you mean fuse a progressive constituency and a blue collar one. So I mean, these things aren't binary. No, they're not. They could be, people could be in both hands. But you know, this is simplifying things to be able to talk about. Of course. But you can look at things like the same sex marriage debate where a substantial coalition was formed around that. There must have been many people of faith that voted for same sex marriage reform. Yeah, otherwise it wouldn't have happened. Wouldn't have happened. And so, and I think that the leaders in that debate, Penny Wong amongst them, were very respectful of sensibilities, cultural sensibilities and sensibilities around religious beliefs in the way in which they conducted that debate. They talked about love. They didn't, they shifted the debate into a different place while respecting religious beliefs and other cultural beliefs. So, I think it's achievable. I think you only need to look at Daniel Andrews to see just a few short months before the federal election. He managed to keep much of his working class space and add to it an urban constituency that swung strongly to labor. Yeah, I agree it's being done better in the regions. But perhaps for Andrews, an example you've raised, right? Is it easier for him, do you think, because he hasn't got the coal problem, which is really the coal climate debate, which is... Well, he's got coal. But and it is true to say that there were elements even within the Victoria that swung against labor, even at the state election in some of those electorates. But it's the way he chose to talk about climate change. For instance, he never used the word for climate change. He often talked about renewable energy and those projects. He also, and you had substantial schemes about promoting renewable energy rooftop solar and the like. And he was able to also show people that, working people that were looking for jobs with his level crossing program and his sort of ambitious infrastructure program that he was going to keep them in work. And I've spoken to a number of my colleagues about this. And I've always sort of thought of this issue. I'm coming from South Australia where we had Don Dunston, who was the pioneer of extraordinary social reform, first to decriminalize homosexuality in the country back in the 60s. And if you get the bread and butter like, if you ensure that people have good jobs and can see a future for themselves and their families, then I think people will be... There's a generosity of spirit where they might have their doubts about some of these other social justice issues. They might not immediately speak to their lives, but they're prepared to accept the reforms in those areas. Whereas if it looks like they're your principal concern, they're the dominant concern and you're ignoring the big questions like what's happening to... Will I have a job next week? Exactly. I mean, if the Labour Party can't address those central questions, which go to the political economy about how resources are fairly shared where there's massive inequality and jobs are disappearing underneath people, how can we... We're asking people to have that level of uncertainty about their lives, but then express this generosity of spirit to something they don't understand and is completely foreign to their lives. And they think that we have... They could be forgiven for thinking we have the wrong priorities. So talk about jobs first, have a social agenda second, or is that too simplistic? Well, I think you can do... You can't do one without the other. You've got to... Well, this is the interesting thing, C, about your review. Because in the various speeches front benches have made over the last couple of weeks anticipating the official history, there's a spectrum of views about this dual constituency issue. There's a feeling around some quarters of the right that, oh, well, you can mute the progressive stuff. We've just got to go full-throated blue collar. You say very clearly in the review, you can't do that. No, you can't choose. You've got to do both. And we've got to find a way of knitting those constituencies together. That is a tough conversation and requires some careful analysis and thinking, including drawing on some international experience. Because this is not a challenge which is unique to progressive parties in this country. It's one being faced all around the world. Look at the US. I mean, we had Obama really having a speech about this very issue about how we conduct ourselves. Well, cancellation culture. Yeah, yeah. Talking about how we, the language we use and the way in which we exclude people. You know, the Labour Party has to, I mean, what's the role of a leader in a democracy? It's to try and talk together a public that can come together and act in its interest. So you've got to draw people together, language of inclusion rather than language of exclusion. Yeah. Well, but is it more difficult for progressive parties because is the cancellation culture or the sort of excessive wokeness for want of a better term, right? That's more dominant on the progressive or left side of politics than it is on the right where one must be able to utter one's darkest thoughts in freedom, right? Is the sort of prevailing culture on the right. I'm talking about the engaged ideological right as opposed to just someone who doesn't care, right? Yeah. So how does, I mean, Anthony Albanese has done two podcast episodes with me in which we've touched on this, this problem of progressive people shutting down people who disagree with them and his concerns about that, i.e. progress doesn't happen if you don't change minds. Exactly. But how do you do it? Well, I mean, I think you've got to learn to love your constituency. I mean, I think you've got to understand the needs and concerns of working people. That's by immersing yourself in their concerns and their culture. And that should be easy for us. I mean, while some of those constituencies swung against us, by and large, they still voted for us. I mean, I want to get this impression here that every working person in this country somehow voted liberal. No, it's not right. I mean, it was the swing that killed us. I mean, we still have the overwhelming majority of working people, low income people put their faith in the Labour Party. So we have a, there is a natural sense in which we can connect with them and we should because we generally speaking, they're in our electorates, they're members of unions that are affiliated to our party. So we should have the rails run in understanding their needs and concern. I think my concern is that these powerful forces that exist, which are shaping the world and globalisation, the trade agenda, they really reduced the scope of autonomy for governments, national and subnational governments. This is very, and so instead of us making excuses for that, I mean, we could run out, if you like, on a conservative left agenda and say, let's have tariffs and retreat to go 1950s, go full protection and just fortress Australia. But we sort of know that that will damage the interests of working people. But I think we've got to be honest. I think we've got to be honest with working people about what the limits of the scope of our autonomy are. Explore though the boundaries of the scope of that activity and invite them in rather than make apologies for the global system. Say, look, globalisation is great, trade is great, in aggregate, you're all better off. What are you complaining about? I think we've got to be much more deeply connected to protecting the interests of working people. This is hard public policy work. I don't pretend to have the answer, but I suppose what we're trying to do is at least shape the question for the party and ask it to devote the resources and consider, frankly, whether it has the structures which are capable of actually assisting us to come to the answer to those questions. Exactly, which is a really interesting point in the review. I'd encourage people listening to actually just go find the review online and read it because it's very accessible, it's presented very excessively and it's very interesting. I think anyone listening to this show will find it interesting. I find it difficult to talk about because you don't do just as 28,000 words, but within a sort of... I mean, this is the longest chat I've had about it. It's much harder to do in an eight minute segment because people just want to focus on bits of it. You really need to... it's helpful to look at the whole thing. Yeah, yeah, well, I agree. It's an organism, the campaign review, and you need to look at the whole thing. So go and find it online. It's not hard to find. Anyone who follows me on Twitter, there's a link in my timeline to go and find it if you're having trouble finding it online. Now, you and I could talk for about three weeks, which is our form, but we need to wrap up. So I'll just ask one question. You obviously ended your career in state politics. It seemed to me you were having quite a nice, quiet life, pleasant life for a period of time, but obviously... Until this came along. Well, I was going to say, drag back into the fray for this delicate balancing exercise. Has it sort of whetted your appetite? Is there any universe in which we see, Jay, whether I'll return to the political fray? Not in a million years, but it did whet my appetite for politics, and it's got me some more interested in getting involved in trying to help answer some of these questions, but not as an elected representative from a fray. We won't see you turn up in the Senate or anything like that. When you say you want to get more involved in formulating the answers to the questions, what are you thinking in terms of how will you become more involved? I look just to help anybody that wants me to help them have this discussion. I mean, there's lots of dialogue about, you know, I've come up with all these really clever questions and maybe I should also roll my sleeves up and help answer them as well. Oh my God. I'm so most of the better having responsibility for the answers. Jay, thank you very much for your time and thank you all for listening. We really do appreciate it. Thank you as always to Miles Martagnone, who is the executive producer of this show and to Hannah Isard, who will have assisted on production this week. I'm just reminding you guys again, there is a new Guardian podcast. It's called Full Story. It is very much worth your time. Basically, we have a conversation. The Guardian reporters have a conversation about a major issue in the news. We try and deconstruct it, get behind it, tell you where the story started, tell you why it's sort of metastasized in the way that it has and try and get some conclusions. It is very much worth your time. Seek it out on your favourite podcast app. We've got a Senate sitting week. Next week in Canberra, I will be back doing something, talking to someone then. Until then, take care. Thank you.