 This is The Guardian. It's not a horse race at all. Each side has a very different objective. The government has the shoreline and is trying to hold on to it. The opposition needs to seize control and they're different challenges because when you are in charge, when you have government, you have got timing, you have got the megaphone, you have got the resources, you've got every tool at your disposal to use the levers of power to hold on. Hello, lovely pod people. Catherine Murphy with you. Each time we do a Guardian Essential poll, so that's once a fortnight, Peter Lewis and I do some in-depth analysis of what the numbers mean. We do this for a webinar that is put together by the progressive think tank, the Australia Institute. This conversation you're about to listen to was recorded on Tuesday of this week, which happened to be International Women's Day. And we discussed, well, I guess we discussed whether or not there is a mood in the country for a change of government at a time when the public's focus is sharply on the floods and on the Ukraine-Russia conflict. How do the major parties intervene to try and shape the narrative? Is it by talking about national security and the location of potential nuclear submarines, or is it by providing cash for women's safety programs? And in the lead up to the federal election, our voters even listening to the story that each of the political parties want them to hear. So this chat is moderated by Ebony Bennett, who's the deputy director of the Australia Institute. And Ebb's about to ask me the first question. Catherine, I did want to start with the floods on the East Coast. They've been devastating and they're not over yet. Can you just give us a little picture of what the debate is like, if there even is one at the national level of politics at the moment? Yes, floods have definitely been front and centre, absolutely. And these events are just diabolical. I haven't been out in the field, but colleagues have. And the stories coming back from these areas hardest hit are just they just break your heart. It's just absolutely horrendous. What has happened to people in Australia over the last few days? There's also been a really, really palpable anger on the ground in some of these communities about the slowness of the response. You know, like getting helicopters in, people having to rescue each other, people having to sort of deal with the catastrophe in real time without what they would regard a sufficient level of support, either from local, state or federal governments. That's kicked off a whole discussion about disaster preparedness and the IPCC report, which also dropped. I think it was late last week. And that basically tells us that Australia is on the front line of this global climate crisis. That is the consequences of decades of inaction by governments, our own government here in Australia and also other governments around the world. This is sadly the new reality. And that raises a whole bunch of policy questions. We were only just beginning to grapple with to grapple with. There's, of course, actions on the mitigation side. So actions to basically reduce the risks of harm to people, to animals, to property. Then there's also the whole area of adaptation and the consequences of that. Like we're dealing with communities now that can't ensure their homes because they've lived through back to back disasters, either floods or fires. You know, we're only just now starting to the conversation that we should have had 20 years ago about the practical implications of all of this. Now, we've got to start to come to terms with the costs that are going to be associated with living in a changing climate as well as obviously the risks to life and property. So, look, this is very serious in terms of the politics of it. You know, people on the ground are saying the feeling in communities is not as quite as visceral as it was during the bushfires, but it's close. And people are, you know, just, yes, very frustrated with government. Yeah, interesting times. It certainly is. And, Pete, coming to you now on the polling, I want to start by bringing up these first slides to share with everyone. And while you bring those up, for those listening to the pod, if you want to play from home, essentialreport.com.au and you can jump in and have a look at the numbers we're talking about, even though you can't see them on the screen of your podcast. So, thanks, Pete Lewis. This first slide that we're looking at is views towards reelecting the Federal Coalition government. Take us through these numbers. Well, this is one of those matrices that pollsters around the world use to pick up whether there is a mood for change. It's not linked to voting intention. It is just a general proposition. Has this government... Is it deserving of another go? Or is it someone else's turn? And you can see that since August 21, there has been a hardening of the view that it is time for this government to move into the annals of history. That doesn't decide the election, but it does create the underlying mood for change. And historically, Australians only change government in a way. Close elections usually end up with the government holding on. So, it says to me that the mood is building. There is still 20% undecided in those numbers as well. But if you got half of those jumping into time to give someone else a go, by the time the election is called, that's kind of pretty close to it in terms of that momentum to change government. I guess the other point I'd just like to sort of mark early is that we look at polling as a horse race and we look at politics as a horse race. We try not to with the essential report. I've just been thinking about that over recent weeks. It's not a horse race at all. Each side has a very different objective. The government has the shoreline and is trying to hold on to it. And without wanting to use water metaphors in the current context, all war metaphors there for that matter, the opposition needs to... It needs to seize control and there are different challenges because when you are in charge, when you have government, you have got timing, you have got the megaphone, you have got the resources, when you do not bring in an integrity commission, you've got every tool at your disposal to use the levers of power to hold on. And we've seen over the last 50 years, close elections, teetering with the GST in 1993, Howard in 2001, even Morrison last time around, incumbents have more tools to hold on. So it's really important for this underlying sentiment to be there for it to be a condition for a change of government. Yeah. Moving on to this next one, general attitudes to change by age. The first bit of this is just saying that my working thesis was we're all over it and looking for something new. What this actually tells us is that while that is part of the mood, the stronger mood is still, particularly amongst older Australians, wanting to go back to the way things were. But there are big differences there you can see in different generations. If you're out into 34, you're ready for something new. If you're over 55, you just want them to go back to the way they were. The telling thing here is regardless of your generation, in numbers, if they're the options, you are not happy with how things are going. So as a framing exercise, I think that creates a bit of a challenge in terms of what the change narrative is. Are we going back and different demographics are after different things? And now we're coming to the preferred political party to handle the Russia-Ukraine conflict. 24 per cent coalition, 24 per cent labour, neck and neck there. 33 per cent no difference and 19 per cent unsure. Pete, what's your analysis of that breakdown when we're a bit divided? Look, I think it is more a counterintuitive result than something that takes you anywhere, really. There is a perception that a Khaki election is what the government wants. We spoke two weeks ago about how the China national security threat wasn't taking, that Labour was actually seen as the better party of managing the complex relationship with China. These figures say that when it comes to Ukraine, there really isn't a brand differentiation at the moment. I think the bigger impact of Ukraine rather than it being an issue that people are going to vote on is the amount of public space it takes up. I think we are in this point where, going back to my earlier analysis, there is a mood for change, but I think there still needs to be some space for Labour and Anthony Albanese to establish themselves. The concern with an all-consuming war is it takes a lot of the oxygen out of the election campaign. It will always be competing with these horrendous unfolding events in the Ukraine, and it also provides a platform for the incumbent to again have the advantage of incumbency of just being up there on a stage, being leaderly. And I do think that while it's not about who's the better at managing it, it still will influence the dynamic of this election. Yeah, Catherine, coming to you next on that, national security defence issues generally seen as stronger ground for the coalition, particularly coming into an election year, certainly with an actual conflict happening. I guess the conventional wisdom would be that we would see that reflected in the polls, but I don't know about you. I was kind of quite shocked to see that, even though previous polls have kind of showed that it's not perhaps the fertile ground the coalition was hoping for. Yeah, it's very interesting because if we look at essential polls over the last few months, we've sort of we've got an interesting story there. We had a poll a few months ago which basically showed the major parties level pegging around management of the economy, which surprised Pedro and I no end. Then last week we had or last fortnight we had the poll that Pete referenced a minute ago. This was about China and Australia's relationship with China. More respondents felt that China was a complex relationship to be managed than a threat to be confronted, right? Which is sort of interesting in Morrison's whole staging of the campaign, which is sort of as obvious as the nose on your face. Then we kind of roll forward to this insight, which is that people aren't necessarily rating the coalition ahead of labor in terms of managing the blowback of this conflict, of this European conflict. All of that's a really interesting picture to me. It suggests that some of the sort of verities that we have used in political reporting are perhaps in flux rather than verities. Look, I work in a major national news organisation. I can tell you that the only thing that people are interested in reading about at the present time are the floods and the conflict in Ukraine. I'm certain we could break Watergate tomorrow and it would not be read at this point in time. People are very, very fixated on those two very important big stories, one international, one local. As Pete says, that is problematic for an opposition that's yet to define their candidate and yet to define their call to action. If people are not tuned in to that political contest and they're focused on other issues, that is not great for labor. Also in that sort of down to the weeds, we see a bit of a swing back to the coalition in this fortnight in Queensland. Obviously a pretty critical state. So, but anyway, I do think it is interesting, though, that these verities that, you know, people who have been in political reporting as long as I have, i.e. the coalition, you know, is marked up by voters on the economy. The coalition is marked up by voters on national security. Our data suggests that that is no longer the case. And that is genuinely interesting. I wonder how much the performance has been, what's undermined that rather than the brand, if you know what I mean. So brand advantage works until you take the product and it tastes like garbage. And I think particularly on national security, Morrison has seen to have been responsible for a series of missteps which Labor has supported in a bipartisan manner, but have managed to take the gloss off their perception of their capabilities on that area at the same time. I want to stick with Ukraine for a bit. Catherine, we have seen the international community, particularly Europe really rally behind the people of Ukraine. This is obviously a huge humanitarian disaster unfolding. We've seen kind of rising levels of sanctions applied to Russia and Australia providing aid and applying sanctions, even though the Prime Minister himself acknowledged, you know, they won't have much of an impact. But just going back to these slides, this next one is attitudes towards Australia's commitment to increasing its financial support and financial support for weapons. Do anything stick out to you from these, Catherine, or is it about what you're expecting given the level of public interest? I think given the level of public interest, I think we could assume even before we had these numbers that the Australian public was on board with the provision of lethal support to Ukraine via NATO, which is what Australia and other nations are doing at the present time. I think GUT tells you people would be on board with that because everybody is seeing these images every night on television, on the internet, of people fleeing from this dreadful, dreadful conflict. And I think everybody watching this conflict has this sort of dread and horror that we haven't seen the worst of this yet. So, and obviously, I think, you know, a democratic country, you know, sort of vulnerable to an ethno-nationalist aggressor like Putin. All of that resonates, you know, this is... And obviously, President Zelensky of Ukraine is just a master in terms of the projection of values and courage in the face of adversity. I think he's become a very sympathetic figure around the world. So, I'm not surprised that Australians are on board with providing lethal support to a country like Ukraine and also humanitarian support. That makes sense. But, I mean, this is just a horrible development, obviously. It's quite amazing, these events, and how quickly things have fallen into place in terms of the world order for a better term over the last couple of weeks. The return of Germany, you know, the sort of rallying around the democratic world. It is, yeah, it's just an extraordinary story. Can I just say that I was a bit surprised at the large number of people, either neutral or opposed, given the almost unitary narrative that has been running through our media, to the extent that people that give a country view are kicked out of Q&A or, you know, we've shut down Russia today and there are, you know, valid policy reasons behind that. There is a large number of people that I was expecting that to be up in the 70s, 70s to 80s, actually. So, I don't know. There's something interesting going on. Yeah, maybe, Pete, obviously, you know, the last kind of, you know, several decades of the 20th century was about avoiding a nuclear conflagration between America and Russia. You know, that whole dynamic in the geopolitical order, you know, resonates deeply with people. Maybe it's just people are just terrified about butterfly effects. Like, what does this mean? What does... Oh, I am. Yeah. No, you know, it makes sense intuitively, right? Anyway, we're speculating. Sorry, Ed, back to... That's all right. And I'm sure we'll come back to this in the questions from the audience as well. But moving now on to these towards gender equality in Australia, we've got a whole range of statements here that people, respondents, could either agree or disagree with. Pete, what stood out to you in these results? Sometimes it's the way you ask a question, obviously. And there's, I guess, the ones in terms of just setting the scene for International Women's Day at the bottom to 80% support for the proposition there should be laws that require equal salaries for men and women in the same position and 76% for the proposition that although there has been a significant progress on gender equality, there is still a long way to go. But then when you turn some of those propositions onto the head, and this is to test negative frames, there is majority support for the proposition that gender equality is mostly to do with well-to-do people, which is a very quaint term, and I'm not sure why we're using this, except that it's benchmarked over a number of years. I think there's a number of well-to-do people in this discussion. And then you've got that, while we've got the 70-odd saying there's a long way to go, you've also got 49% saying it's largely been achieved. So I think that says it's how you frame a question, the same people will give you different responses. And for those that want to sort of dig deeper on those gender questions, go to a centralreport.com.au, have a play. And if you go into the gender, there's a really interesting insight, particularly on that question, gender equality has mostly been achieved. Knock me down with a feather, but 58% of blokes versus 42% of women think it's been achieved, which leads to one of my sort of general insights on this, which half the Australian population thinks we've got a gender problem. So, Katherine, coming to you, I want to come to that announcement from the weekend and the Prime Minister announcing, well, a whole bunch of ministers announcing a big package for women's safety and equality in general. I think we're expecting kind of something along those lines. But can you just take us through some of the highlights of that package and how far it will go towards fixing the problem? Yeah, well, there's an interesting component of the government's package around consent that the government will fund the Human Rights Commission to do a big data set on that point with Chanel Kontos advising. And I think that's really interesting. And we've seen both from the government on the weekend and then Labor today in terms of International Women's Day. If you're listening on the pod, obviously we're speaking on Tuesday. Labor had a consent initiative as well this morning, $77 million towards skilling teachers to have conversations about respectful relationships with students. There were other measures that the government put forward about violence and safety. Like all of this is welcome and it shows that the conversation, I think over the last 12 months, has begun to shift the dial a bit, really, on certainly at the political level, even though there are... Well, look, I mean, it would take me three hours to tell you how much there is still to do and how difficult some of that stuff is to actually do. But I think we can be negative and we should actually welcome progress when we see it. And there is visible progress, I think. Certainly, I think the government's learnt the odd thing over the last 12 months and that's good. I'd finish off the observation, though, with that rather quaint occasion that we've got, that quality is the province of well-to-do people, well-to-do women. I mean, let's just call it for what it is, well-to-do women. And we've seen an interesting debate, I think, start to spring up. I mean, not that it's new. People who understand gender theory and who are active in this area talk about intersectionality a lot, which means that feminism is a cause for not only white women, for all women and for women, indigenous women, women from different ethnic backgrounds, women with disabilities. And that the conversation needs to be inclusive. We have seen a very interesting, I think, debate in the public square over the last 48 hours about that since the launch of a list of demands over the weekend by a group of very prominent women, including Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins. That group is more diverse than it's been given credit for in some of the toing and froing I've seen in terms of debate about it. But we need to bear in mind when I acknowledge the progress of the last 12 months, and I mean it, things have shifted over the last 12 months, and that is bloody welcome. We do need to understand, though, that the conversation over the last 12 months has left a lot of people feeling more silenced and more marginalised than they have felt previously. And by that, I mean First Nations, women, people of colour, et cetera. It's really been a discussion, a white feminism discussion over the last 12 months. And I think everybody who's active in this discussion understands that it needs to be a broader discussion if we are to ever overcome Pete's point, which is that half the country thinks we've got a gender problem. We do need to actually grow the roots down and ensure that these conversations are inclusive, both for all women, regardless of means, background, et cetera, but also men. And, you know, it needs to be an inclusive conversation. Otherwise we had no it. Yeah. And I think for people interested in exploring that kind of criticism of the last year of activism and who gets platformed and included and who is excluded, The Guardian did run a really great op-ed that people should check out. Nina Fennell, who began the Let Her Speak campaign, also had a really interesting tweet thread on that problem of who gets raised up to be a voice for feminism and who doesn't get included in that activism and that story. And I will just say for those interested in Teach Us Consent, partly the reason why that survey that's been announced is so important is because that will actually measure whether the funds that are now going to go into schools to help teach consent all the way, I think, from kindergarten through to year 12, part of Chanel Contos' activism. The survey will actually help measure how much of an impact that's having on attitudes towards consent and knowledge about consent among school-aged children. So very exciting and well overdue. Yeah. And can I just say one thing really quickly, I just want to say on International Women's Day, I think we also need to be mindful, notwithstanding the point I'm making about inclusivity and making sure that the conversation is as broad and deep as possible. I just want to give a shout out to all of those women, Grace, Brittany Higgins and others, who have put their own traumas in front of the Australian people over the last 12 months, over and over again, in order to shift the dial on some of this stuff. These women are people. It's incredibly difficult to do that. Many of us listening to this conversation today will have, for being had similar experiences. Not everybody feels as though they can talk about them. I think we need to be really profoundly grateful to women who feel they can bring their personal stories into the public domain in order to affect social change. It's not without a cost. So I just actually want to acknowledge that today. Yeah. I think we might go now back to the horse race on the slides. Inevitably. Just to lower the tone a bit. I think what we've got next is federal voting intentions. So we do have a federal election coming down the line towards us very quickly, as well as a federal budget. Pete, primary votes, what's happened here? There's been margin of error movement over the last fortnight, which is why we hate doing week to week. There's been a three percent drop for Labor's primary and a two percent upswing in the coalition, which anyone that understands margin of error means absolutely nothing. Labor is bouncing, coalition is bouncing. If the election was called at the moment, undecided votes would determine the outcome. What else stands out here? Greens are sitting at 10 percent, which is as good as they've been. The independence is hard to get a read because we do a national average. So we can't really pick up the impact of the teal independence on a national vote because they're not campaigning everywhere. And I know that many of the people in this room will be interested in how they're going. Forty nine, forty four, seven percent undeclared. I'm not sure if that gets much lower. I was doing some focus groups a couple of days ago. And the number of people that just say, oh, I go into the booth and I look at the two bits of paper and I make my call then it's real. There are a bunch of undecided voters, people that just decide at the end, which is why, again, that analysis of the wave. If the zeitgeist is for change, I think change occurs. I look back on 2019 and say, well, does that theory hold? And could I have seen that coming in advance? I felt at the time in the lead up to the election, two things. One was it was really messy and fractious and there was just being overwhelmed with policies and images and a lot of conflict. And the other thing was we asked a polling question the week leading up, which said, are you happy? And we had this big, big number of people that just said, yeah, I'm happier. It just felt like it wasn't there this time. It might be different this time. I'm just not prepared to call it yet, although I don't know. I go back to I think it's either going to be a big win or no win at all. This is the way I'm feeling at the moment. Right. Well, we might go now to questions from the audience. I can see that we've got over 900 people on the line with us today. Thank you so much to join for joining us. You can put questions for our panel in the Q&A box and just to remind you, you can upvote questions from other people if you think they're good. The first question is from John Knox, and this one might be for you, Katherine. We're seeing scientists increasingly linking natural disasters with climate change. Could this cause problems for the coalition giving their mixed messaging on climate? Oh, God. Oh, you want to kill me. You want to kill me. Look, in terms of how it plays through the election cycle. Well, I just returned to my familiar analysis for guys who come and share this conversation with us regularly. Climate change works differently in different parts of the country. The coalition has got a significant problem in metropolitan Australia now because of their unconscionable record on climate policy over the last 10 years. That's why we're seeing the rise of teal independence. That's why we saw Scott Morrison negotiate around the clock last year with the national party in order to land a net zero commitment because the coalition does have a problem in parts of metropolitan Australia. Now, voters are joining the dots. Voters are working out that, you know, that the conversation over the last 10 years, the weaponisation of this issue has not been in their interests. So there is there are certainly a bunch of voters who are who are motivated and activated by this issue. There does remain, however, differences in different parts of the country. You know, and this is where sort of the crossover point between the climate science and culture war is so terrible for progress on this issue. So how does it play out in an electoral sense? Well, look, it's hard to judge. Certainly, you know, it will it will impact differently in different parts of the country. I think it is more difficult in this election cycle for the coalition to entirely weaponise climate action in the way that they have done in every election cycle since Tony Abbott won. I do think it is increasingly difficult for them to do that. But I also do think that their narrow casting does still have resonance in parts of regional Australia. And I guess we'll have to wait till election night to just see how much resonance, I guess. I will just pick up one more question on this before we move on to other topics. The next question is from a Jaya who talks about in days gone by Bill Shorten campaign, wanting that the cost of inaction are far more than the cost of action. How much inaction costs do you think we have incurred in the last three years of natural disasters, Catherine? Oh, boy. Well, look, obviously, in fairness to the government, the change in climate is a global issue and Australia is not in and of itself a major emitter. We do have one of the most carbon intensive economies in the world. And we export, sorry to be rude, a shit tonne of emissions to the rest of the world. So we're not as minuscule a player as the government would like to present us as. But I need to say to be factual that obviously, global heating is a global problem. This failure has been a global failure, right? Not just in Australia, but obviously, the coalition has its own record to which stands before us. You know, what's the cost? I don't know what's the cost in dollars? Well, a lot if you count sort of rebuilding after the bushfires, if you count the cost of the count sort of rebuilding after the bushfires, if you count rebuilding after this flood event. I mean, my heart bleeds for these people who are still living in caravans on the south coast, people who have lost everything in the floods, who, you know, once they hit, you know, the logjam of insurance claims and then the backlog in materials in this country at the moment, like it is going the recovery from this is a year's proposition, not a five minute proposition. It makes me so angry. It makes that this is the position that we find ourselves in. So, look, of course, there are dollar costs, there are costs, you know, in property destruction. Obviously, it's had a, you know, an impact on species. You know, we got to get serious, people. We got to get serious. So, you know, I guess I think I was when I was on the inside, as I'm trying to remember who said it at the weekend, whether it was Raf Epstein or Peter Van Onselen, somebody said it very crisply that, you know, the cost of the mop up jobs after these disasters is Australia's carbon tax, to the extent that we are all paying it. And and, you know, yeah, anyway, I think I've made my point. Yeah, I will come to you in a second, Pete. But again, the Australian Institute, we've proposed through our research and National Climate Disaster Fund, funded by a levy on gas and coal exports to help fund, yeah, mitigation and recovery after disasters. That fossil fuels certainly contribute to turbocharging. So head on over to Australian Institute.org.au to find that. But, Pete, it's a longstanding election issue. But where is it in the polls at the moment, in your opinion? Is it up there in terms of issues or are we still kind of in the thick of it with the floods and whatnot? Look, I think the floods has two impacts on the sort of current narrative. One is it reinforces for those that believe climate action is urgent that there are real consequences, as Catherine was speaking about. I think it creates a real not that you need another proof point, but just another reason why people will get behind the teal independence in inner city seats across the East Coast. I also think there is the competency issue, the reminder of bushfires where he didn't hold a hose with all the water that's going around at the moment and essentially, again, the government to an extent has been MIA, particularly in the distribution of funds before the event, particularly around Lismore. On climate more general, I just think that both major parties see it as being an issue that is in their interest to neutralise. Labor sees it as an issue that will be weaponised against it in particular parts of Australia, which they need to win back. The coalition, and you could see by Morrison's incremental, but nonetheless, movement on on targets sees it as a risk in the inner city. So I don't see climate being the chosen battleground for either of the major parties. That's not to say there isn't a role for either teal independence or greens or other outside smaller players to be trying to influence that debate. But to me, it will not be the battleground of this coming federal election. Catherine, I wanted to ask you about the announcement of that 10 billion dollars to build a base somewhere along the East Coast for potential submarines. You know, the national heightened state of national security. You can see why the government kind of wants to give the impression that things are moving ahead. But correct me if I'm wrong. We don't have a contract yet. We don't have a submarine model yet. We don't know how much it will cost yet. And we don't have a date for delivery yet. Am I wrong on any of those? No, no, I can't fault your logic. I'd add one more thing. There is also the ongoing mystery about how Australia is going to build nuclear submarines when it does not have a domestic nuclear industry. That has been a head scratcher right from date on how on earth we're going to perform that magic trick. Look, the government, I suppose, in terms of what's actually happening here, well, the change in contract means that there is potentially focus and by that, sorry, I should be clear, but the change in contract made in the cancellation of the French contract and the shift to the August arrangement. It does sort of leave the government with this strategic gap that we don't, you know, that this sort of threat environment is is objectively difficult. Right. We have tensions in our region and tensions in the world. That's not politics or Scott Morrison making that up. That's a thing that's happening. We definitely live in dangerous times. The prime minister is exactly right. And I suppose the lack of actually having assets that we can deploy at this point in time, because of all the reasons you said, no, no model chosen, no costings, no idea, frankly, about how this is going to play out. There is a political downside for the government in that, because it's sort of like, oh, my God, what have you done? We're vulnerable at the dangerous time. So obviously, in political terms, the government does want to convey this sense to voters. Look, we're on it. We're going to make these decisions as quickly as practicable. And in terms of the location of the basis, we have this sort of, well, you know, maybe this one or maybe this place or maybe this, you know, I mean, it's sort of a bit silly. But but it it sort of keeps the issue live and in front of people and looking as though it's going to reach a landing point. The curiosity about the three locations is my colleague, very hardworking foreign and defense correspondent Daniel Hurst, had a look at the defense assessment in 2011 for places you might want to put a submarine base. And look, I know this will astonish everybody, but the three places that the government pulled out of the hat weren't top of the pops in terms of where you might put a submarine sort of base anyway. That inspires confidence. It also reminds me a bit about a decade ago when the coalition was floating nuclear energy and then all of a sudden the other side is putting out postcards with the nuclear power plant on every point. It seems to me that the political benefit, the political benefits of going early is the Kaki election, national security. But there's a real risk here as well, particularly, you know, down in that area, which is, you know, it's a lie, but it's one of the coalitions looking at down at Jarvis Bay. Yes, Gilmore. But yeah, would you like a would you like a nuclear sub base in Gilmore? Anyway, yes. So there are all of those things. So, yeah, look, it's a bit of politics and it's a bit of it's a bit of practice, as I was trying to say a second ago, right. We do actually have a problem here that we're attempting to fix. And whomever wins the next election is going to going to be inheriting the August problem big time. You know, are these submarines ever going to be built in this country? I have my doubts. I really do. You know, it just doesn't make a lot of sense to me. You know, at what point does that communicate get communicated to the Australian public? Oh, sorry, guys, actually, we're not going to build them here. We're going to buy them off the shelf from, you know, London or America. Right. At what point does that become known? At what point does the cost become known? And and also what is happening in the geopolitical environment in the interim? You know, all of these are big and important questions that go beyond a bit of pre-election politicking. But there's certainly that at large at the present time as well. Yeah, a couple of decades, I'm sure, between now and when they if they get here is certainly enough time for some big changes on the political scene internationally. We've got questions in here from Jill Newton. Do we think a khaki election is unlikely to help the coalition as much as it expects, which we have touched on a little today? Catherine, can I come to you on that first on the prospect of a khaki election? Yeah, well, it's sort of interesting. I think that, you know, that that whole trend that we flagged a bit earlier in today's episode, the sort of, you know, the more nuanced view of voters on China is not an automatic starter in our question this way for people to be thinking the coalition automatically does this stuff better than labor. That does point to some sort of a shift that again, it's sort of it's the problem with our data. It's sort of like this is a really valiant exercise that we do sort of tapping the national mood. But seats are elections are determined by the point of view in a number of different seats, right? Unless as Pete has been saying, you know, the floods on and sorry about the metaphor, but that the big mood for change is on, right? It's a seat by seat proposition. And we don't really have our kind of, you know, microscope down at the seat level looking at how these things are playing out. Certainly at the national level, it suggests there's a bit of a seat change on. There's another piece of evidence that I think is quite interesting from the time when we were last together, which is a fortnight ago. You know, we were right in the middle of that hirly burly Manchurian candidate kind of rah rah going on from Scott Morrison at that point in time where he was really trying to paint labor as a national security risk that that had a rare backlash from elements of the national security establishment in Canberra. And while Morrison hasn't changed the overall message frame that we live in an uncertain times and risky world, he's dialed that stuff way down. So whether that means that he overshot and voters thought he overshot or whether they're concerned that they really don't want to bash them up every five minutes about this stuff, I don't know. But I think there has been. He hasn't given up, though, Catherine, he's trying to link Ukraine to China and I don't think he's thrown in the towel yet on that one. No, no, no, no. The message frame is still there. But I think some of the specific claims he's kind of starting to moderate a little right now. I mean, totally great, Pete, like this is the play. The Kaki election is the play. But I think if we look closely, we see a little bit of a message moderation. Yeah, but we get back to that point, I think. And Pete made it most compellingly. I think that the risk for labor at the moment is not so much the issue, although the issue is always tricky for them. But that deprival of bandwidth to just get your own messages out there. It seems to me that those big national moments reinforce the strength of a leader. And I do think the one thing that's happened to Morrison over the last 18 months is his authority has been undermined, partly from performance, partly from quite a targeted political strategy from the opposition to bring into doubt his character and his sense of responsibility. So I think he's going to struggle in that regard. Well, that was our webinar show called Pole Position that's made for us by the Australia Institute. There's a video of this, too, so that you can see all of the slides. If you're interested in having a look at that, I'll link to it on my podcast web page on The Guardian. I'll also put up a link where you guys can register for the conversation if you want to watch it live next time. It's just a Zoom meeting, very easy to register and pop in so that you can ask us a question in the Q&A section of the conversation. Thanks so much to Miles Martagnone, who is our show's EP. Thank you very much to Camilla Hannon, who edited the program for me this week. And of course, we'll be back in your feeds this coming Saturday.