 I put one line in there saying, workplace in trench culture or bullying intimidation, which I've experienced from the opposition and from within my own party. Those were the deadly words because I didn't realize- You mean like the traitorous words. The traitorous words. She's traitor, treachery, terrible, horrible. Let's make her, you know, let's take her through the sexist spectrum somehow. Let's silence her. Let's create fear. All of those things. I didn't realize that I was- I would, with those words, become the whistleblower. Rolling now. Hello, lovely people, and welcome to the show. You're with Catherine Murphy, the host of this pod and political editor of Guardian Australia. And I'm so delighted because I haven't seen Julia. Well, since you left. Yeah, this is my first time back to Canberra since 2019. You're stressed. Walking around. It was interesting. We'll get to that. Sorry, we're racing ahead and I'm not following good podcast practice at all. My guest, of course, if you haven't recognized the voice is Julia Banks, who's a memoir about her life in corporate Australia and the rather interesting experiences that she had in political life is hitting the bookshelves this week, isn't it? Yeah, today. Yeah, today. Woo! Okay, all right. Just for the record, we're recording on Thursday, everyone. So you'll hear this on Saturday. So anyway, Julia is in Canberra. So I'm delighted we can do this face-to-face rather than remotely. And she's in town for an event tonight. And we thought this would be a really good opportunity for us to catch up. So sorry, we're just going to bore you with our catch up, guys. But no, just we want to... There's lots of interesting things that Julia's memoir brings into the public domain. But there's a bunch of other things that I have been dying to talk to her about in a conversation that others could hear, just about her experience moving from corporate life to politics in the election where you won the only seat, yeah? Mm-hmm. In Chisar. Yeah, took the only seat from Labor. Okay, we'll start there. Okay. With taking the only seat from Labor in the last federal election. So you were a corporate counsel, a lawyer. You had experience in a number of big companies. You win pre-selection. You win the seat. You arrive in Canberra to your new political life. What happens? Well, I was... I'd sort of been on relatively high alert because it really... The different culture... I guess a lot of people don't appreciate this from the outside world. But the political world doesn't operate like a parent company. I was saying all the subsidiary companies, like the different states, the political animal is largely driven out of the states before you get to Canberra. And I'd experienced a highly sexist, toxic culture almost from day one. Very exceedingly sexist culture. I describe it in the book, Catherine, as Mad Men Meets House of Cards. It was just sort of really... It's really weird. And I was asked to run for pre-selection for a seat that no one in the Liberals cared about at that time because it had been held by Labor for over 18 years. There was very little hope of winning that seat. And then I guess, yeah, 2016, the night it all happened, when Anthony Green called it, it was the only seat we won from Labor and served my term under Malcolm Turnbull. I joined the Liberal Party. I've not been a political animal. I didn't engage in student politics. I'd been an observer of the political world, obviously, working in my corporate career. And the Liberal Party were calling for more women. I saw good moderates such as Callie O'Dwyer and Malcolm Turnbull and Julie Bishop there. And I joined the party and then asked to run for pre-selection. I was even told you won't win pre-selection because you're new to the party. Yeah, that served your time. But there weren't many people interested. So they thought, oh, well, we'll let it run. And then I won. But it wasn't a heavily contested pre-selection by any stretch of the imagination. But if I do any job, I want to do it properly. So it all started with the phone calls that you have to do if you're running for pre-selection. And I remember diligently having my plan there and making these phone calls after work. And I rang a few members and then told a branch official I'd rung so and so and so and so and so and so. And he said to me, oh, look, you should have called me first. I can check that they're safe. What does that mean? That's exactly what I asked him. And it was sort of like a safe. I haven't got the Labor Party list here, have I? I just thought, what am I doing here? But look, I guess the difference between the fundamental difference and a lot of my corporate colleagues and friends ask me this is what's what's the biggest difference? And the biggest difference is, you know, in any sort of in my corporate and my legal life, even when you change jobs, you change employers, you change workplace cultures, you nonetheless go in with high trust unless someone disabuses that trust. And I've worked in the robust areas of litigation and corporate deals and all the rest of it. But you you fundamentally trust people, you know, and I'm firmly of the view that everyone's got good somewhere there and I trust someone until they disabuse that trust. In the political realm, it is the complete opposite. And it was the first bit of advice I got, which was don't trust anyone, you know, check that people are safe. And it's it's an incredible it's it's an almost an entirely different way of thinking. It's quite extraordinary. And I'm asking Julia these questions because as she's laid out, she's not you didn't come up through all the increasingly traditional channels of being a staffer or being an apparatchik. You worked in corporate Australia and then you came across. And it's been my observation over the last few, well, few terms in particular, that that politics is sort of becoming hostile territory for humans. I wish I called my book that. It's sort of like, look, at one at one level, there are it's just I have witnessed this phenomenon time and time again, sadly, that lateral call them lateral recruits, people like you, who have had a life and a bunch of experiences outside what happens in this building often will just hit the fence because it's sort of because the culture from which you've come can't be aligned with the culture in which you find yourself in terms of politics. Now, I don't want to sound completely pessimistic or nihilistic about that, because, you know, you weren't here for a long time, but you were here for a good time. I'm not diminishing your service in it at all. It's just this point that we do need humans in politics. We do need them. Yeah, the environment makes it very difficult. Yeah. And it's sort of like in corporate and in any other sector, if you start a new job or a new employer, you go to a new employer, you have an induction process and not the sort of, you know, school for school for the police school school, which is, you know, the toilet blocks are here and, you know, don't take photos in the chamber. And that one's the speaker. Yeah. And even that, like just a funny aside, but I remember I've got the sense of direction of a cocker spaniel. I remember walking around the house with the tour guide and I'm thinking, okay, can place it where that piece of art is, you know, and then just at that time, the tour guide said, and don't mark out places because of the art, because we rotate. He's got to say, yes, I'm pretty sure the art rotates. But it was all housekeeping items. And indeed, even the sort of recent discussion, like I threw it in the mix in terms of the presence of alcohol in the place. That to me, again, is a housekeeping item that was dealt with back in the 80s. I spoke to like the New York Times wrote about this, that in the White House is a completely dry environment, except for, you know, you know, function areas, obviously. And but those are all housekeeping because culture is defined by the leader. And you know, my job, part of my, a big part of my job was workplace culture and governance. And I spent my life training new employees, training current employees, training older employees like we'd have to rotate governance training about our code of conduct and all that sort of thing. Yeah. Every every few months. And now it's being implemented here like it's something new. Yeah, it's amazing. And you know, it's sort of like the the corporate world dealt with the fact that you can't report something into an HR director if the HR director is a sexual harasser. Like they dealt with that, you know, back in the 90s. And why do you think why do you think it's it's taken such a long time because it's sort of this, as you say, right? This conversation is only just happening now. We're having over the last six months and we'll get we're going to get right into the last six months and the importance of it. But it really it's it's just now we're talking for the first time. Oh, that's trained senior staff how not to sexually harass staff or to deal with complaints. And absolutely, why is that not happened here? I don't look from my perspective. You know, I pretty much got the rough draft of my book ready by around March. It was sort of like the rough structure, the you know, the chapters. And then of course, the Brittany Higgins event and the cascade of events coming out of Parliament House and now all these changes proposed. And I thought to myself, I published that book in March and was asked to publish a sequel I would have called the sequel told you. That's what I would have called it, quite honestly, because I think I think the rest of the world, you know, the rest of Australia in human land would just think, really, is it really like that? I've had so many of my friends, you know, ask me, yeah, just how can this be? How can this be? And this is, yeah, and we've done we've done a lot on the podcast over the last six months, just trying to explain this phenomenon to people that normal HR practices do not operate in this building. I mean, they do in in my organisation, but not in the organisation that you were in. That's right. And just tell me about booze, too, because you mentioned booze. Yeah. Right. So I'm curious about this because journalism was another profession with a huge booze in culture. Yeah. But now, I will certainly hear. Yeah. No one would drink except, like, you know, I don't know, someone's birthday or some, you know, whatever. You have a glass of champagne, like no one no one hits the booze along this corridor now. No. So what happens downstairs? Well, people just well, every MP has booze in almost every other MP has has booze in their office. And it's sort of and there's countless, a countless number of events going on everywhere. Yes, and there is a real culture that, you know, well, we'll get the, you know, free drinks or the pre-dinner drinks. I remember I went to one event and I lasted about I lasted about two minutes because the poor woman, the waitress who came out with a tray of champagne glasses and it was it was a massive event where everyone, all MPs and all their staff were invited. And she hadn't even come out from behind the screen and people ran to like, yeah. And I thought, my God, it's like an 18th birthday party. Like, really, that's I was I was actually disgusted. Like boarding school without the rules. Right. But I just it was just quite shocking to me. And, you know, the really funny thing for me, it's almost a you serious was that people say, oh, you know, she entered politics because she was so naive, like naive, naive. It was just I wasn't naive. I just thought there would be some semblance of normal culture aligned to corporate culture. Yes, exactly. Well, a set of expectations that most of the rest of us are familiar with. Yes, and that, you know, most senior executives by the time they get to my level, if you change a job, you you fast adapt to the new culture. But here, you know, and that's what that's what my expectation was. But you try and fast adapt, but you realize that you can't adapt because the the practices are so antiquated. Like, for example, I worked in the corporate space in crisis and risk management. That was, you know, I led many crisis management teams. I worked in the pharmaceutical business. So if you have a product recall of a pharmaceutical, I actually worked for the company during the swine flu pandemic. Right. So I saw, you know, crisis management in well, I led it basically. And the one thing you do about all good companies do after they've gone through a corporate crisis is you do an after action review, no matter how small or how big the crisis. So you can look at things you've learned, you know, what you could have done better, what you did really well, all that sort of thing, and then apply that to the future future processes. So when I won the election, well, when my team and I won the election, I just assumed that I would be swamped with requests from within the Liberal Party to say, actually, you did it differently to all of us. You know, what can we learn from you? What can we learn from you? Given you're the only seat that you didn't ask once. I just wasn't asked. I wasn't interviewed. I wasn't nothing. I thought I thought they would want me to speak at events. You know, the like Young Liberals, I used to used to sort of have a go at them. And, you know, it turns out that the president of the Young Liberals was always a young liberal man, of course. And I'd say, you know, I'm happy to come along as a speaker. Wouldn't that be refreshing? Have a woman and, you know, someone who won. Right. And I remember I was ribbing him about it just before the coup in 2018. And he said, I said, who have you got for your young liberal ball this year? And, you know, why haven't you asked me? I've offered so many times. And he said, oh, we've got we've got Tiny Abbott this year. I thought, OK, I'm done. That's it. Right. I'm done. Just on that, like your post crisis review, right? Oh, you and I need to get to sexism in a moment, because you and I have many feelings on this subject. But just in that post crisis review mode, when you the other thing that's very common in serious corporations is the exit interview. Of course. When you move. Yeah. People want to understand why you've left. Yeah. And what your reflections are on the culture and all of that sort of stuff. Right. Did you have an exit review? Oh, no. No, really, isn't it? If you can't be exit review of the social media trolling that I continue to get saying, ha ha, you lost. You know, no, no, you didn't. In fact, the trolling I thought it would stop once I lost, but it just got so bad. And from from leaders, you know, former liberal leaders, you know, they were all just gloating. And I remember it just got so stupid and revolting. I just I literally deleted my Twitter account. Facebook. I just thought, no, you just let it all go. Because I dealt with it all during the election and then it just kept going and going. Well, you must you must really get under their skin. Well, well, well, seriously. Yeah. Well, I don't know. It was just it was it was quite an interesting experience for me. I remember during the independent campaign and we had a big community event to which I was invited at the for the Business Association in Flinders electorate. It was probably about 200 people there. And and Greg Hunt was there and of course. And I got up and made my speech and I started my speech and it was just completely spontaneous. But because I'd been talking to people just before it and everything. And I said, I can't tell you how good it is to breathe the business air again. Not the parliament. And that's sort of what the floor down. And I got walked down and people in within a shot of Greg Hunt, which I don't think he really liked very much. But you know, we're saying that was that was the best aspect by far. You know, you you get business and blah, blah, blah. It was it was quite it was just really extraordinary. Because it's for me, I actually felt the contrast. Yes, you viscerally felt it in your soul as a human. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Let's touch down now on sexism because we've we've referenced it on the way through. And as you said, what's the reference in your book? It's like a cross between madmen and house of cards. Right. So why do you think the liberal and national parties? Because I do actually think on this, there are quantifiable differences between the major parties that has not always been the case. In my reporting lifetime, labor started off really no different to the liberal and national parties in terms of that default feminism or not. Right. Yeah. Like the two cultures were actually very similar when I started in the mid 90s. Yeah. And what's happened in the Labor Party through affirmative action and quotas and all that sort of stuff is now there's critical mass. Yeah. And I'm not saying that everybody in every bloke you meet in the Labor Party is a feminist. I mean, quite the contrary. Yeah. But there's there's now a sort of starting position in labor that's quite different. Absolutely. To where things started. Right. In the liberal and national parties, it does remain a boys club. And again, I don't look Julie Bishop if you're listening. Kelly O'Dwyer if you look. All these Kay Patterson if you're listening. Judy Troth if you listen. Like you know, of course. Right. Like you've had some superb. Yes, absolutely. Really fantastic. Right. Yeah. So but inherently it's it's a boys club. Why? It's it's because of the numbers like the numbers don't answer everything in terms of parity in terms of gender equal leadership. But as we know, the Labor Party introduced quotas in the mid 90s and I can't speak through the lens of the of the Labor Party. And I'm sure like you will. I've never been a member of it either. I'm just observing. I'm sure that we will still see the headlines. So I'm sure their culture is not perfect. No, it's certainly not the panacea. But it is a critical core piece towards gender equality to have that gender equal leadership. I saw that transformation in the corporate world. You know, when I when I started out and I was on boards, it was like nine men and I was one of one or one of two women on the board. And I remember when targets were introduced, which you can introduce in corporate because you can incentivize it to people's salaries. Yes. And you even it up. The dialogue is different. And and if I can point to an example that, for example, I thought the Labor Party's policy on childcare that they introduced last year was signature. And I don't for a minute think that Albo got up one morning and thought, I'm going to introduce this childcare policy. I think it has everything to do with the fact that they have a balanced, you know, a number of men and women in their party. It makes a difference. It changes the dialogue. I think I think that's right. But but also, I mean, it sort of seems a bit silly to kind of raise this because in a way, what I'm trying to say is, OK, childcare is a good example, Julia, right? So Labor comes up with a childcare policy. Obviously, they've got people like Tanya Pliberczyk and Amanda Rishworth and those those women driving that as well as blokes who are not from the Stone Age in your own party room though, your former party room. We saw a debate very recently about whether childcare should even be a thing. Yeah, that's right. It's outsourcing parenting outsourcing parenting. And, you know, I was observing that obviously through the press and I know how that party room works. And yeah, first of all, it was only the women who spoke up. Yeah. And there were women that are there who challenged it. Oh, there was I think Jason Polinski might have as well. But fundamentally, that voice, that's great for the party room. But that's going to get drowned out because they haven't got the numbers. They haven't got the numbers or the voice. And just as I've argued that that party room with the number of climate deniers and the dynamics of that party room, you don't have to be a rocket scientist to work out that the moderates voice has been drowned out on climate change action. It's similar in relation to issues which relate to women in the workplace. Even their perception that childcare is a woman's issue. It's actually... It's rather than a family issue. In modern corporate, it's, you know... Everybody has parental responsibility. Exactly. But it's that problem of, and again, like I'm not saying this through a lens where I think conservative voices shouldn't be represented in the nation's parliament. Conservatism is a valid philosophical tradition that obviously should be represented in the nation's parliament. But it sort of becomes more complicated for the liberal and national parties because there is this sort of critical mass of conservative blokes. It's not just that there's not enough women, although that's absolutely right. It's the blokes that are there are like a couple of decades behind in their thinking. So what do you do about that? Well, again, I believe the leader defines the culture. I do believe Morrison has a very traditional view, which he holds viscerally. And I'm not being critical of stay-at-home mums, but any view beyond that traditional homemaker is a view that is held by a number of men in that party room. It just is. And sure, there are women in that party room, as there were when I was there, that have a different background. There are women in that party room, like a lot of the men in the party room who are career politicians as well. But nonetheless, if you have this intensive conservative voice and you couple that with, and it's male as well, you're not going to get sound policy because fundamentally, because half our population are severely underrepresented in the nation's parliament. And the sort of sexism, anyone who's watched your interviews associated with your book will know that that incident you recount in the Prime Minister's Office, that really terrible incident that you recount in the Prime Minister's Office where a colleague will sexually harass you. Do you think, I mean, obviously you've recounted that example. Do you think that that is a very common experience? Oh, absolutely. And I'm not saying it doesn't happen in the corporate world where there are structures and there are mechanisms and there are whistle-blows systems, but it's probably more covert in the corporate system, but at least there is some semblance of system or recourse. But it's not to say that there are thousands of women out there in corporate land who are keeping their secrets as well because of their job or whatever. And I recount that incident, even though far worse has happened to me, as I'm sure to millions of women, far worse. And women are dealing with this every single day. And then you hear the whole, that trope about not all men and, you know, well, of course not all men, but, and women know that not all men are sexist, misogynist, you know, philanderers, whatever, or bullies. Women know that. We know that. We're married to them. We work with them. You know, all my bosses invariably have been male, middle-aged men, and, you know, most of them, 90% of them are amazing individuals. But, but we also know, and this is the critical stat, that 98% of women don't make up these stories. They don't make up these stories. And what is particularly annoying is when other women come out and say, well, it's not like that for me. It's a perfect world. That is just like, seriously. Hey, maybe, maybe you've walked through life, you know, and you haven't had any, you know, sexist behavior at all happen. Yeah. Fantastic. But it doesn't mean that I'm making it up. No. And, and, and look, good luck if you've managed to get through life either not being sexually harassed yourself or not knowing anybody who has been sexually harassed or worse. And most of us do know someone who's been through something worse than that. Yeah. You know, good luck to you. But understand that you are, you are not representative. That's right. Well, that's not like the data shows that, that those experiences, those, those blessed experiences of unencumbered, yeah, female-ness in male domains, that, that's not, that's the exception. That's not the rule. That's right. And I think that's what it does. I mean, you can see this, this is the really disturbing bit about it. Is it just, it's simply harnessing the gendered stereotype. It is just simply saying, well, sending the women out to say, well, she's a liar or, you know, it didn't happen to me that, you know, all the blokes are beautiful. No, it's silencing. It's like, it needs to be called for what it is. It's just a form of, a form of silencing and it's, it's, it's a completely absurd and the other completely absurd one that's coming out in the last few days is, you know, Senator Henderson saying that, and this was said during the independent campaign that I was tricked by the Labour Party. Well, this is your naivety again. Yeah. Remember? That I'd moved from Malcolm Turnbull telling me what to do every day after he left to, you know, it was the Labour Party suddenly, you know, I haven't got a mind on my own. I didn't make those decisions. Well, that's, I mean, that's of course like a woman without a, without a brain, of course, has a stellar corporate career with men just telling her what to do. I mean, obviously, I mean, oh my God, when will it stop? She's like, first of all, she's this weak pedal. Oh damn it. She won't shut up. Okay. Right. This is, she must be being told, told what to do by these horrible Labour people and Malcolm Turnbull or whoever, someone, some man, somewhere, some man, some man, some man, somewhere. Let's end this way because I've seen, I mean, it's, as is always the case of these conversations, you know, I could go on for about four hours, but anyway, that's where we're only just warming up really. But anyway, no, I have seen over the last couple of days, I've seen in preview the first couple of episodes of a series that's coming up on the ABC. I think, I think next week, I think it drops. I'm not entirely certain, but this is the series you may have seen promos guys, Annabelle Crabby's fronting a series on women in the parliament called misrepresented, which is quite fun. I've seen, yeah, the first couple of episodes. What has struck me is, well, it's enormously powerful. Yeah. I've seen it, so. To see you all there, a bunch of you across the political spectrum sharing, I mean, the experiences are so common that there's some lovely editing cuts in it where one woman starts the story and another woman finishes it. It's the same story. It's so universal. Yes. And it's really powerful, those sort of narration devices. But look, I've known, I think, oh, well, there are some women from, you know, perhaps from the 70s who I've not had any dealings with. Most of the women on the program are women of my generation in terms of in the parliament. So I know most of you. I've seen you operate professionally over a long period of time and how careful women are in politics because it's so easy to blow yourself up. Right. But to see you all, like, I can only describe it as a truth has possessed you all. I'm not suggesting that you spent your time here lying. But there's something about what's happened in the last six months that has given a bunch of you a license to just tell it like it is without having to think about, oh, will I offend some bloke if I say it this way or will people be repelled by my message? So did you ever think in this journey from your old life to the political life that you would end up in these circumstances where you're part of a genuinely you're part of a movement and obviously what needs to change in Australia is well beyond what happens in the parliament. What needs to happen in Australia is what happens out there in the world. But I think it's been wonderful for me to see political women just absolutely prioritizing truth in their recounts of stories. So what does it feel like to be part of this minor revolution? I sort of say to your point, like during my term, there's one thing I would never do and it's compromised my values. So I always talked about. Yeah, you did. Absolutely. I was talking for quotas even though I was quietly told don't mention the Q word. Yes. The Q word. Well, you can't even say the word quota. Right. Quotas are a labor solution to a liberal problem. Don't mention the F word, being a feminist. So I did all of that and what I didn't realize when I announced I wasn't going to recontest the next election, I was going to do the corporate thing. I was going to sit back on the back bench, continue to serve through my term so that I could continue to advocate and all the rest of it. But I wanted to continue that threat of honesty in the politest way possible. And I put one line in there saying, you know, workplace in trench culture or bullying intimidation, which I've experienced from the opposition and from within my own party. Those were the deadly words because I mean, like the traitorous words, the traitorous words. She's a traitor, treachery, terrible, horrible. Let's make her, you know, let's take her through the sexist spectrum. Somehow let's silence her. Let's create fear. All of those things. I didn't realize that I was I would with those words become the whistleblower and you know, the open whistleblower in twenty eighteen. It's pretty weird role reversal when you think about you as sort of general counsel. Yeah. Like you're the guy or the woman with the telescope waiting for the whistleblower to jump them right. Like so anyway, it's pretty sort of funny role reversal. Yeah. And you know, they tried to minimize it to, well, she'd experienced bullying during the coup week. No, no, no, no, that's not what I was calling it. I witnessed other women, certainly. But it was it turned out that those other women who were really quite affected by the bullying, you know, I'd experienced my share, but I could handle it like of setting court rooms. But, you know, it was those other women who came out and said, oh, actually, it wasn't bullying. It was just a bit of lobbying. And like, oh, no, we're going to deal with this by internal reviews. That was just and then I had the bloke saying and Morrison, you know, Captain Number One saying that I was an emotional wreck, like just through this whole stereotype. And I think hopefully we've moved beyond the internal review that goes nowhere. And hopefully there will be these structures. But as we said at the outset, they are years behind. And until there is leadership and accountability and the tough calls are made, then nothing will change. Yeah. And you know, things have to change. Let's end on this. If there are young women listening and there will be a surprising number of young women actually approached me about the pod, which is delightful. That's fantastic. It is. It is. So so we can be both confident we're talking to young women. If you're a young woman listening to this conversation and but you think you really want to get into politics because it's the only way to change the country. Right. Yeah. Yeah. What would you say to them? I'd say to them during their career journey, always make sure your values aren't compromised and that they're aligned to the leader's values, the ultimate leader's values, not just the corporation's values, but the leader, because the leader will define the culture and always, always put trust at the top of your list. If that's not there, then find another find another pathway. But I think, you know, that's that's what we need. And may I say my experience outside of the Liberal Party when I became an independent outside the constraints of the major parties, the community, like we've got 200 volunteers within five weeks and there were it was just this whole vibe of politics with purpose and people really wanted, you know, because people are out there. And that's why I really believe that to have to have a circuit breaker in our body politic, we need the independence to have we need the independence to make up the balance of power and to be sensible centrist, preferably women to balance the numbers out as well. But I think only only then will we get real action on climate change, on humanitarian issues, because the thing about an independent has far more power than a backbencher of a major party, because you don't you have that into direct interface with your constituents. So you know exactly what, you know, people want what your community wants, and you're able to implement that to fight for that if you've got the balance of power. Yeah. Yeah. Whereas in a major party, your voice will can be drowned out in the party room or beforehand, particularly if there's there isn't the numbers of women. But I really look forward to a time when, you know, I was I was told that the Liberal Party would seriously have considered quotas if they'd lost the last election. I really believe mandatory quotas is is is an urgent imperative for Australian federal politics for us to have good representation of the Australian population. And a lovely note to finish on Julia. Thank you. I appreciate this conversation. I appreciate the forbearance of our audience listening to us catching up because we haven't seen each other face to face for ages. So it's been a really delightful conversation. If there's any questions, Julia is back on the socials now you are back on Twitter and Facebook. I'm not on Facebook. Oh, you're on Twitter. Okay, so you easily try. What's your handle on Twitter? Julia H banks. Okay, Julia H banks. So if there if there are young women or men who have a more specific question that they want to put to you that's being triggered by anything in the conversation. Absolutely. Give her a shout out. I'm sure she'll get back to you. And I'm on LinkedIn as well. I'm on LinkedIn. Oh my God. Yeah. Corporate friends out there. Exactly. Right. Okay, very good. Yeah. And and the book is called Power Play. Yeah. And it is in bookshops. Now if you want to track it down. Thank you. As always to my executive producer Miles Martagnone. And thank you to you guys for listening, sharing, telling others about the podcast, etc. We'll be back next week. Thanks so much. It's so great to be here. And thank you. Thanks. Thank you all for watching.