 I honestly believe this is deliberate and it's sort of one of the reasons I find him really fascinating as a political figure. The more you look, the less you see almost. It's sort of like he deliberately absents himself from the transaction. It's like he doesn't want a blockage between what voters might want to project upon him as a Prime Ministerial figure, I think. Hello lovely people of podcasts and welcome. Today just for something a bit different, we're flipping the normal script. On this episode of Australian Politics Live, we're interviewing, wait for it, me and David Maher will be the guest host for this particular episode. I've recently spent several months, well really since the start of this year, February, March, April, I've been writing as well as my normal day job at a Guardian Australia. I've been doing a quarterly essay about Australia's Prime Minister Scott Morrison and also about how the governments of the country, well both the Prime Minister and the governments of the country, handled the first wave of the coronavirus. It combines a sort of journalist's narrative of events, key events, during the first phase of proceedings and it allows the key protagonists to narrate the stories really in their own words and there is also a profile of Scott Morrison and his politics viewed through the lens of the pandemic. I'm doing some events around the quarterly essay, some all in conversations and for this particular one, the lovely David Maher, my dear colleague, interviewed me about the process of writing this quarterly essay, what I learned about the Prime Minister and we recorded that conversation for you all to hear. Here we go. But this essay to me is a compelling example of here is something we're so familiar with we can almost barely not listen on the news to get more about it but it is finding the narrative makes sense of the events and to talk as you've done to principal players and how they came to their first decisions and there's this wonderful sense I think you were aiming for of however much we know about the pandemic now, we have to remember that the big decisions were made quite largely on guesswork. Yes, yes and that was really, yeah, hunch and I say in the piece that strangely it would have been so easy to miss this event even though it now looms so large in our lives we've almost forgotten what it's like to not be in it. Right at the start, given where Morrison was at, he was coming out of the tail end of the bushfires which he obviously mishandled in full public view. Spectacularly. When Parliament resumed, it resumed with this thunderclap where the Nationals just had a giant tantrum and sort of all stormed at their leader Michael McCormack to no result. It was also in the middle of the sports grants fiasco. This was a seriously busy extended guy and extended government and they could have quite easily missed the onset of this pandemic but they didn't. But as you say David, it's not like there are a set of rules or a set of perfect information that one can apply in these circumstances. You get all the inputs but at the end of the day you have to make decisions based on imperfect information and Morrison references this in his conversation with me in the essay that this is a genuine difficulty and that that's at the core of government. It is the art of making decisions with imperfect information. It's at the core of leadership too, isn't it? Because one of the great qualities of a leader. Yep. And I think it's one that's overlooked in so many profiles, biographies of current leaders. This knack for judgment which can't really be sourced or analysed or dissected but do you have judgment? But do you come away from the sight of Morrison in action? Because this man has judgment. I think he, well it's variable. It's actually variable but I think he does have very sharp instincts which is sort of what you said a minute ago that the decisions are partly instinct. I think he does have quite sharp instincts although he doesn't get it right all the time. I think what enabled them to make better judgments in this crisis, particularly at the start, was the benefit of the bushfires. There's a piece in the essay, there's a reflection from Christian Porter where he said that the cabinet because of the mishandling of the bushfires there was this hyper vigilance in the cabinet about not making that error again, not finding themselves stranded by a major event and unable to position themselves in it. And so I think they were assisted by having mishandled the first federated crisis. And they weren't going to make that same mistake. They weren't going to make that same mistake and perhaps, I guess it's all a question of emphasis isn't it? I mean, perhaps in the rush to not make that same mistake may have resulted in over engineering in this crisis compared to the first. But I think it's kind of multi-factorial. Morrison's got good instincts. Often he has good judgment but not always. And I think the people around him were as, let's just give it to Porter, were hypervigilant after the bushfires and absolutely determined that whatever this new thing was, that it wasn't going to be a cocker. Can I contrast the two crises and suggest that for the bushfires, one of the problems, one of the political problems for the government was the verdict to be experts. But in this crisis, in the coronavirus crisis, there was no political downside to listening to the experts. Yes, yes, yes. Well, that's exactly right because the expert advice or well, the subject that the prime minister couldn't broach in the first crisis was of course climate change. And that was part of what sort of rendered, he had this strange paralysis during the bushfires. It was more than climate but climate was at the root of it. It was obviously a subject that couldn't be ignored but he had no language for how one could speak about climate change safely without being immediately set on by the colleagues. So that was certainly part of it. Climate definitely and experts, you're right, experts in the first fraught, experts in the second easier because obviously the Liberal Party hasn't had a civil war over epidemiology or at least not yet. So you're right that there was a clearer pathway to accepting expertise in the second than in the first. But it was also, I think, learning in a different way from the bushfires. Again, part of Morrison's problem in the bushfires apart from the fact that he couldn't speak about climate change without being beset by mad people was that there was nothing to do in his head. Right? The premiers are responsible for emergency management. They send out the fire trucks. They do all that bizzo. And he can't himself hold fire hose. As he said, famously, I don't hold a hose mate. So the prime minister was kind of bereft because he is a doer. That is his political personality. So when the second federated crisis came around, which was the pandemic, I think he really resolved that he would not be in this sort of semi-impetent position again, that he would create a governance structure that literally put him in the center of the action, that appointed him the prime minister of the premiers. And that's what happened. They created this emergency government of nine. And again, that was part of him learning from the first experience that he was not going to be in a position again where the states would have all of the control of the issue and he would be rendered a bystander and an awkward bystander to boot. And by listening to the experts and setting up a national structure for addressing this crisis, Australians saw perhaps something quite unfamiliar to them, which was the government taking effective action and putting aside, at least for a time, partisan playground fights and getting on with it effectively. And this is not something I remember seeing in Australia for a very long time. No, exactly. It was, and that's why I went, this is getting back to that point about recording the history. Why not just do a profile of Morrison? Why delve into the most over-reported event of the century? Well, because important things happened in those months, really important things happened. And they created or there was this wonderful rapprochement that happened between a political class that had shown every sign over the last decade of being dysfunctional, busted ass, right? This is our political class, right? Not to put too fine a point on it. We had this event where governments rallied. They set down the tribalism for a period of time. They looked at evidence. They worked methodically through the evidence to solutions. They presented to the Australian people as broadly competent, astonishing, who knew? Collaborative, right? Collaborative. Willing to admit mistakes. Willing to admit mistakes. This was a very profound thing that happened in our collective experience. And one of the really fascinating things that we tracked at The Guardian because we run the essential poll data and during the crisis we ran a poll every week. And I actually saw it come back. I saw trust come back. I mean, trust in government is this extraordinary thing, as we know, that collapsed under Kevin Rudd. Yeah. And it collapsed when he turned away from doing anything effective about global warming. Yeah. Since. And here we have this crisis, government acting. Do you think it was a time when suddenly people, I mean, I know it was true of me, starting to think, well, if government in this country can actually do something, then maybe it could do something about and a long list of things which in the last decade governments have studiously refused to do anything about. Yes. Well, wouldn't that be marvelous? If that would be marvelous, global warming would go back on that list. But it seems to me that you capture this beautiful moment in the quarterly essay when there seems to have been a profound shift in Australian government and trust. But do you sense that it's going to last? I would love to be ebullient about this. I would love to be brimming with optimism because God knows we could use some optimism. But sadly already, I think we are seeing reversions to type all around the place. We've sort of reached a point in the crisis where we are reverting to business as usual. We've seen this particularly over the last month or so in this sort of proxy war than actual war between Scott Morrison and Daniel Andrews, the most interesting relationship in the Federation. And the Prime Minister tells me in the essay, the key fusion in the Federation. Actually the key fusion is looking a little bit unfused at this point in time. But it's sort of not just as simple as Daniel Andrews and Scott Morrison have fallen out and now it's toys out of the cot and it's all kind of horrendous again. I think the problem is, I guess one of the implicit questions in the essay is how long can a Prime Minister set down ideology, how long can that happen? How long can the leader of an established major party set down ideology in favour of practical problem solving? That's the key question for me. And the evidence suggests possibly not for that long. You see Morrison now starting to be sort of buffeted by a whole bunch of cross currents. There's the dynamic in the government where the government is now asserting to the Prime Minister, you are not the Prime Minister of the Premiers, you are the Prime Minister of us, the Liberal and National parties. And we have a bunch of views about what does or does not happen in a crisis and who might be to blame in the event that everything goes pear shaped, i.e. not us, that Daniel Andrews that needs to wear the lion's share of the blame. So you see that happening. You also see normal election cycles because obviously we've got to run a state elections coming up, Queensland and we've had one in the Northern Territory, we're having one in the ACT where state Premiers are also playing to their own constituencies and are being pulled away from this government of national unity because sort of partisan weight is coming to bear on them as well. So when does the Guardian next pull trust? Well, funny, funny, you may say that David, if people read the Guardian tomorrow they may see some new things to them. I didn't know that. Catherine, I don't want to be personal, but how many Prime Ministers have you reported? Yes, let's bring my age into this. I'm just going to your expertise, not your authority. I'm not at all offended by my age. I had two weeks of Paul Keating when I started as a very baby journalist. I literally turned up in the last two weeks of Paul Keating before that election. So everybody from then? Yes, I've had John Howlett read of the current bloke. Is this man the hardest to read of all of those men and women? Yes, by a considerable margin. Why? Partly because I do borrow from Gertrude Stein in the piece and I say there's no there there. It's partly because he is at his core this hybrid of a Prime Minister and a campaign director, which is not what we've had in the Prime Ministership in Australia in my reporting lifetime. It's partly because you cannot identify, or at least I can't. I'll be fascinated if anyone in the audience can. I devoted quite a lot of thinking to this as I was writing the piece. I tried to identify that the Hill Scott Morrison would die on politically. For all of the previous Prime Ministers, I can identify a Hill. For this fellow, I can't. Now, because the way he comes at politics is not from the point of view that the Liberal Party has a set of values that I am a custodian of and I will project to Australian voters. Scott Morrison believes in, I guess he's a populist at heart. He thinks the age of politicians imposing their values on the community in this sort of grand narrative about reform, he thinks that's done. He does not think that that can happen anymore. Therefore, governing now in 2020 is about understanding the problems the public wants solved and getting about solving those problems. Now, that's not the— You've sent a course for the problem of having in your own party an ideological block that does not want a number of those problems solved. No, well, this is the intriguing thing that obviously in sort of presenting this picture of Scott Morrison as this kind of uber pragmatist, I don't want to convey to people that I think that he's not partisan because he is. He's absolutely—he's blue team to the core, this guy. I also don't want to suggest that he is entirely devoid of ideology because we can see it across the pandemic response as well as on the issues that you correctly identified the Liberal Party has trouble talking about, right? But I just think left to his own devices, the Prime Minister is a problem solver, not someone who is sort of brimming with any particular ideology. So that makes him different. He is different from all of his predecessors in that respect. But I suggest there's another thing that makes him different, which is that there's no kind of story of Morrison. There was a story of Keating and a story of Howard and suburban solicitor. There was a story, God knows, of Kevin Rudd, the Mandarin scholar who's come down from the north to be our leader. There was definitely a story about Gillard and Abbott is all story and no achievement. There is all story. There's a curious lack of story about this man. Yes, but this is deliberate. I honestly believe this is deliberate and it's sort of one of the reasons I find him really fascinating as a political figure. He sort of, the more you look, the less you see almost. He has this reflective quality. It's sort of like he sort of deliberately absents himself from the transaction. It's like what people see as a manifestation of their own desires in a way. I know this probably sounds insane to people listening, but I honestly believe this to be true. He tamps down the story. He sort of dialed up his own story during the election campaign, David. We had a little bit of a... We saw into his church, for instance. Yes, exactly. Yes, we saw into his church. We saw this sort of avuncular suburban dad type product that... Jen and the Girls. Jen and the Girls. We saw a bit of that, but again, it's very racist. He doesn't want a blockage between the voters and what voters might want to project upon him as a prime ministerial figure, I think. What do you believe? I wish he'd engaged. I don't know. Maybe I'm terrifying. I don't know. I really... There's a piece anyway for folks who haven't read the essay yet. There is a piece about Morrison and his faith because I wanted to go there because in part as a counterpoise to this idea that I was presenting this prime minister who was... There was no there there. That's a pragmatist, a person devoid of convictions because that's not right. The prime minister believes in God. His faith is very, very important to him. It connects him to the people who he is closest to, it forms a community and a hinterland for him and also a connection point with some voters. I wanted to engage him on what faith is for him. I grew up in the Catholic Church and faith was about suffering and doubt. Scott Morrison to me, he's obviously grown up in a Pentecostal tradition, which is not my world. I don't understand Pentecostal traditions not having grown up in one. I suspect he's very certain about his faith. I suspect he's very literal in his beliefs. I wanted to draw him out, not as some exercise in entrapment because faith is so important to this man. If we understand more about Scott Morrison's faith, I think we'll understand more about our prime minister and the way he sees the world and the way he processes information. We had a very cordial conversation for this essay and he gave me some generalities about faith, but he did not want to engage on this question at all. He said to me, I can't remember the exact phrase, but it was something like, I don't parade it or I don't make a... But you have to say that. The last person, it's interesting, isn't it, that of the last three or four prime ministers we've had, faith has been this very big issue for them. Huge issue with Kevin Rudd. Remember his press conferences he would hold? Outside the church. Outside the church on Sunday? Yes. Outside the Lich Gate of St John's? Yes, indeed. Then Tony Abbott, of course, Mr Faith. Yes, that's what that... That's faith I recognise. That's the one, yeah. So we had the Anglicans, we've had the Catholics, now we've got the Pentecostals. Can I take you to task for something I think you do which is really cruel? And that is approach the prime minister with respect. And I think that the damage you do to this man by being quiet, respectful and attentive to him, not shouting, not raging about him, but analysing who he is and how he operates, is damage that perhaps will never be repaired. I think that's an overstatement. I do approach him quietly and I approach him in the way that he approaches the world, which is in a highly attuned and observant way. One thing you wouldn't know about Scott Morrison if you just get the glimpses, you get the packages on the television, is how attentive this guy is. How... He's a good point. He's a watcher. He is absolutely a watcher and he can read a room, not all politicians can. But he is very attentive in my experience anyway of his surroundings. He makes judgements very quickly, very intuitively. I say at one point in the essay, it's sort of like, I wonder whether it's the policeman's gaze or the son of the policeman's gaze. His father, John, was a policeman, a New South Wales policeman before he was a local counsellor later in life. And I speculate at one point whether this is the policeman's gaze that's being sort of modelled to the son, that you've got to learn very quickly what side of the line your opponent is on, whether they're on your side or another side. Look, I don't know, it's a bit of whimsy really. But look, yeah, I would prefer to phrase it in that way, David, that I approach the Prime Minister in the way that the Prime Minister approaches the world. I liked it very much. I liked the quiet of it very much because it allowed us to look to the detail and see the man clearly. He's a great, one of his great skills, I think, I don't know what you think of this, is not answering the question. He is a phenomenal non-answer. Oh, God, yes. Well, it's very taxing for us who are showing up every day in Canberra. He doesn't mind questions being asked, he just minds answering them. We find this again and again, although he can sometimes confound you and answer a question. But mostly not, and particularly if he doesn't want to answer, you're not getting an answer. It wouldn't matter if you sort of set your hair on fire or whatever performance you put on, you're not getting an answer. It's just blank. Today, I gather, I wasn't in the office today, but my dear colleague Paul Karp, who has been relentless and wonderful on the sports grant story, and has been attempting to get a question up in a press conference, the last couple of press conferences, about the latest information in relation to sports grants. I gather the Prime Minister turned on his heel and left. He has shut me down in press conferences in the past. He has shut me down. If he doesn't want to answer, it's very difficult to get an answer. He's not Robinson Crusoe there, of course, as a political figure, but he certainly won't answer a question that he doesn't want to answer. Is it time for journalists to start to work together to compel answers? When one journalist is fobbed off, instead of the next journalist going on to some other issue, does it happen once or twice in the White House press room? It's enormously powerful, but it seems not to happen here. Yeah. Look, it does every now and again. I can remember in one instance asking, it was during one of the asylum policy debates. It was a medivac. It was about the medivac legislation. The Prime Minister said something that wasn't factual. Yeah, it proved. Well, it just wasn't true. And I pulled him up on it and he became quite frustrated, obviously, with the dynamic. And I thought, oh, well, that'll be that. But a couple of my colleagues, David Spears and someone else, picked up immediately afterwards and pursued it. And I was really grateful for that because I wasn't intending to make a scene. I just don't think it's right if Prime Ministers aren't factual in their answers. But you're right. It happens more infrequently than it should. I don't really know why. I think probably because there's a bit of a mindset that may have developed from the days where press conferences were not all that frequent. We're in some strange circumstances at the moment where they are now happening all the time. But I think possibly the mentality sort of extends to the pre-pandemic era where Prime Ministers may not appear that frequently. So if you've got a question to answer, you've got one to go. You've got to grab that opportunity. Right? You've got to grab it. So I don't know. I haven't thought about this deeply. But I suspect possibly there's a bit of that in this rather than just sort of being obtuse or failing to assist colleagues in need. I think possibly we journalists can get a little bit obsessive in our focus and not always that attentive to dynamics around us. One of the little doors, one of the quiet, sorry, not little, but one of the quiet doors you opened for me in this essay was the observation that this man doesn't really like Parliament. Yeah, he really doesn't. Yeah. He really doesn't. Explain. Well, it's sort of fascinating again because it does mark him out from other Prime Ministers. I don't think Kevin Rudd loved Parliament, to be frank. I don't think he hated it. But I don't think he loved it either, to be honest. I think Julia Gillard did. I never detected any sort of particular derision on Malcolm Turnbull's part about Parliament. Keating, well, obviously. Howard, well, obviously. It's sort of what gets him out of bed in the morning, that whole kind of barepit theatrics. And it's kind of fascinating about Morrison because he's obviously a very forceful guy, right? He is that forceful person. He's a forceful presence in Parliament. He is. And it's not like he doesn't, you know, it's not like he sort of avoids conflict. So it's genuinely strange. I think it's just that the Prime Minister does not like constraints. He likes to be able to set his own agenda on his own terms. He likes latitude. He likes room to move. And Parliament is just gravity. Parliament is, it imposes weights on Prime Ministers. There are rituals in the day that burn up time. Time you could be doing something else. You've got to sit there and prep for question time. And the whole kind of, the performative element of the chambers, it's just, it is all gravity. And this Prime Minister is always packed for flight. Yes, and he can't just turn on his heel and leave question time if things get off. Well, you can't. It's sort of, you've just got to endure that. And look, he is, you know, I don't know if this comes out in the essay or not. He has a ferocious work ethic. He is a very hard worker. And so it's not that, you know, he doesn't like the work. I think he doesn't like the constraint. And there is no easy departure, as you say. It's not like if you just had enough of this, if you really don't want the 38th question on aged care or whatever it is. Sports or? Sports, whatever. Yeah. You can't just nick off or change the subject. You're there and you've got to possess yourself with the patience in order to get through those moments. And you know, and I don't think he enjoys it particularly much. A question has come in from one of our viewers, which I think is a wonderful question. Great. Which is, to what extent this man is like Trump? Okay. Yes. Well, I say in the essay that I have seen with my own eyes, I have seen the Prime Minister try on a Trump suit. I've seen him pop it on, go for a little wander about in it, see if that works. Yeah. All the, all the bizzo and I've seen him take it off again because I don't think he thinks that really does work in the Australian context. I think there are some elements of Trumpism that you can see in Morrison's approach and instincts. I do think, and there's, there is a section in the essay about Morrison kind of sort of fiddling with the dials on sovereignty and on nationalism and on sovereign capability and on Australian exceptionalism, which is mildly Trump-esque. A bit of a stage of Trump, yes. Yes. There's, I think I say in the essay that he tried on the Trump suit, he took it off. I think it's still in the wardrobe, the Trump suit. I don't think it's been sent to the cleaners or to the tip. I think it's in the wardrobe still. It may be, it could be called upon, but I think his judgment, his sort of judgments about how one does a version of authoritarian populism in the Australian context are some of the more interesting manifestations of his own prime ministership. He's still working out a language for all of that stuff. He doesn't want to be a carbon copy of Trump. He really doesn't genuinely. I don't think he does. I think he wants to be his own thing. And in fact, you guys listening on may remember the treasurer somewhat rashly at the press club a couple of weeks ago, he mentioned that he's heroes with Thatcher and Reagan. And the prime minister got quite annoyed by that, that one would be looking to war horses of the past to articulate one's philosophy. And he, and rarely because he and Josh Frydenberg, I think have genuinely have a good relationship and get on well. The treasurer was rebuked, in fact, by the prime minister for these, for these thought crime. So it's kind of like, I think the short answer, sorry, a bit of rating, the short answer to the Trump question is he's tried on the suit, it's in the wardrobe, it hasn't gone away yet, but I don't think he's Trump. And I think in some respects, he's quite different. That suggests to me that this is a country in which truth has a bit more traction still than in the United States. Well, look, God help us David. I mean, seriously, look at America. Look at it. It's sort of, it's so terrible. It is so terrible, that kind of, that coarsening, that polarisation, it is terrifying. It is absolutely terrifying. The greatest, one of the greatest countries in the world is in the most horrendous tailspin at this point in time. And we in Australia think, well, we import some of those, well, we import the culture wars, we import the sort of media climate, we import many things from America, but we are not America. Thank God we're not. And I think we as a society need to really double down on this idea and resist this sort of coarsening polarisation, people proposing things in order to fight about them rather than resolve them. We absolutely need to resist this with every fibre of our small Australian beings. Thanks Catherine, very much. Well thank you so very much for listening. I just want to be clear, this conversation between David and myself was originally recorded from an event that the Melbourne Bookshop readings set up for us, fabulous people at readings. We've also put up a link to, on our podcast page, to where you can find other conversations that readings have hosted with authors, people like Melissa Davie, my colleague from Guardian Australia, Miranda Tapsall, Virginia Trioli and many, many more. Check that out. We'll be back with you next week.