 This is The Guardian. 2030 sounds like, oh, it's years away, we can plan all that. Eight years for a big change like this is buggal. We are starting far too late for a 2030 target, but we have no choice because we're only elected in 2022. But 43% is a big ask. It's actually ambitious. You know, the safeguards reforms, you know, that's a big lever to be pulling, an important one. And the nation, $20 billion worth of expenditure to get up to 82% renewables. That's a big job within 85 months. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You're on Australian politics and you are with Catherine Murphy. And with me in the podcast this week is Chris Bowen, Minister for Climate Change and Energy. And of course, if you're following the news and particularly the global news, you'll be aware that the UN led climate talks are underway in Egypt as we speak. And Chris is shortly to depart to COP, what number? 27. 27, but who's counting anyway? COP 27 in Egypt. So obviously I needed to bring Chris in to bring listeners up to speed with what COP is about, what we think is going to happen, you know, what's the importance of the conference for Australia, and then we're going to drill down into a number of other current policy issues. So, Chris, what, I have very fond memories of traipsing around COP26 in Glasgow. What is this COP about from Australia's perspective? Well, a few things, Murph. Firstly, we're back. Now I'm not here to overstate, you know, what a difference Australia can make, but we can make a difference. And if you think about the two big differences between COP26 and COP27, it's a change of government in Australia and a change of government in Brazil. They're the sort of two big differences. And we in our own ways now bring a constructive approach to the table. And in the past, we've lined up with people trying to stymie progress, stymie action. Now we're lining up with a progressive coalition trying to actually progress action and working together. So there's the actual negotiations. COP has really sort of hit the ground in the second week. The first week is more leaders statements and, you know, what have you. The second week is when negotiations really, you know, get to the business end. So we'll be there constructively. Again, I'm not here to say Australia is going to come in and, you know, change everything around and save the world. We're not going to do that, but we'll be working with colleagues to change the dynamics, you know, in the lead up to COP. I've been talking to, you know, people like John Kerry and Alok Sharma without going into sort of the diplomatic finer details of those conversations, saying, well, you know, how's it going and what role do we best play and, you know, do you think you could do this, et cetera, working together, which is I'm told by my international colleagues. A huge sea change in the pre-COP approach from Australia. Yeah, incredible in COP26 because obviously Scott Morrison went with a commitment to net zero, which was a sort of big deal in coalition terms. But it was very home in the real world. Yes, anyway. Anyway, so, OK, so that's Australia's objectives. Now, in the opening days of the summit, a concept called loss and damage has dominated certainly the discussions and the coverage. But there will be quite a few people listening to us, Chris, who have no idea what loss and damage is. So why don't we start with what that is and then let's move on to where you think the COP will land on this point. So loss and damage is really the loss and damage that is encountered by developing countries in particular as a result of climate change. So if you think about every country pays a price from climate change. But developing countries have less resources to deal with that change and are often more impacted because it's not rocket science. If you're heavily dependent on agriculture in your economy and you've got ongoing droughts and natural disasters, that is a bigger impact on your economy when agriculture is a huge proportion of your economy as for many developing economies. Or if you're a small island developing state, natural disasters in some cases have cost 200 percent of the size of their economy, for example. So loss and damage is actually about how we deal with that. Now it's actually not a new concept. It was actually mentioned in the Paris Accord as something the world is going to have to deal with. That's actually been in the Paris Accord. So Australia signed up to the Paris Accord under Tony Abbott. So therefore we've been involved in this conversation. But we haven't been involved very constructively in the past. So we have said on behalf of Australia, we support loss and damage being part of the agenda. We believe it's time to have this conversation. Now that doesn't mean, again, that we sort of solve all the problems in Sharm el-Shaik. But it does mean that we make progress, take the ball forward. Now to get to the domestic politics and domestic substance, briefly, Tony Abbott, sorry, Tony Abbott, I'm afraid I'm asleep. Understandable in some circumstances. Peter Dutton wanders around saying, oh, this is a massive compensation bill for developing countries that Australia shouldn't have to pay. Well, in fact, the Egyptian chair of COP, they're now the COP chairs who are putting this on agenda and leading it, specifically say, and the agenda says the outcomes of this agenda item are based on cooperation and facilitation and do not involve liability or compensation. So it's not about sort of writing a blank check and saying, oh, he's a check to compensate you for what's going wrong. It is about saying, well, how is your country struggling to deal with this and how can we help? And that strikes me as a particularly unobjectionable and indeed good thing to be doing. And it involves a discussion about how our aid budget works with that, how we can best engage in that. So you're going to see just some domestic sort of cheap politics by the LNP on this. This means they're doubling down on the last 10 years. They haven't really sort of changed, but that's okay. We on the other hand are dealing around with our colleagues around the world. Egypt is proposing a discussion about a fund which would be finalised in 2024. I mean, Egypt has sort of won the COP presidency because they're seen as champions of the developing world. That's what they're proposing. So we'll engage in that conversation. I don't envisage, you know, we'll walk out of Sharm el-Shaq and everybody will say, oh, this is wonderful loss and damage is fixed. I do hope that we are able to progress the conversation in a way that the developing world has a serious voice at that table and the developed world is engaging very seriously in those concerns. But just conceptually, because obviously we can't talk about a fund which is likely not signed sealed and delivered by the end of COP or maybe, but too soon to say. I don't think it will. Yes, too soon to say. So we can't obviously drill into a fund that doesn't yet exist. But just conceptually, there has been this sort of dialogue around green financing initiatives for a long, long time where a number of, well, some developing countries just don't accept the proposition that we owe the developing world some developed countries, some developed, right. But then there's another subset of that, which is about multilateralism, that countries want the sort of in a sovereignty sense to do their own deals with their neighbors. I'm thinking about us in the Pacific, because obviously we are already dealing with loss and damage and adaptation and transition in the Pacific. So just conceptually, would Australia, are you moving in a direction where you're okay with a multilateral fund in the event that's where it lands? Or will we seek to say we've got a substantial aid budget, we have our own initiatives in the region, we are sort of taking care of the region. That's a terribly paternalistic way to express that. But you know what I mean. We're stepping up in the region. We're present in the region. I'm just interested in that. I completely understand where you're going with the question. And I mean, we'll work all those issues through. But perhaps if I could use the example of a similar issue, which I think you're sort of hinting at in your question, which is climate financing, which is a bit different to loss and damage, climate financing is helping developing countries in particular who have limited means, you don't get their emissions down, et cetera, and work with them. So there's a very similar debate going on in that space. Now, there is the Green Climate Fund, which basically the rest of the developed world is in and Australia is not, Scott Morrison took us out. There are some people say, well, Australia should just rejoin that. There are people in the Pacific who, however, say, well, the Green Climate Fund doesn't really work for us very well. Okay. It doesn't cater for our needs. So it's not a no brainer. You do have to think those things through. So we've said we went to the election promising our own Pacific Climate Financing Fund, which we're getting on and delivering, and that's very important. We know we have to have ongoing discussions about green financing, climate financing, particularly with our focus on our region. What's very important to me is what the Pacific tells us is best for them. You can mount the argument, to be very frank with you, you can mount the argument we should rejoin the Green Climate Fund and get on the board and try and fix it, or you can mount the argument that, well, actually in the Pacific, that doesn't really work very well, so we should focus our efforts. These are things that we will work through the Green Climate Fund. It doesn't have a replenishing round until next year. We very much recognise that under the new government, we're back in green financing and climate financing. Hence, we're establishing our own Pacific facility to assist, but then we need to have ongoing discussions, particularly with our Pacific colleagues about, well, what's next, how does it look? Penny Wong, Pat Conroy, the Minister for Pacific and I have had, and will continue to have strong engagement about, well, what's the right way through here? Just one more on COP and the dynamics of COP before we come back to domestic issues. Obviously, I mean, there's been a great observable rapprochement between Australia and the Pacific, but obviously Pacific leaders do want the government to go further in terms of phasing out oil and gas and other things. Thus far, that's been expressed, I think, very diplomatically in terms of the Pacific. They're not shaking your cage, but we do know that is the view of a number of Pacific countries. You can understand, I'm sure, at one level, the argument that we're assisting the Pacific with the transition while still being a major exporter of fossil fuels, which is causing the problem. Now, let's not get tied up in this sort of COP detail about where emissions are counted. Let's not do that. I'm just asking you conceptually, where do you think the Pacific will continue to press that point? Will that become a source of friction? Because we've sort of been through this cycle of rapprochement, right? Now, inevitably, you touch down and then that opens a new cycle of something else. Yeah, yeah. Well, look, you're right. I mean, Penny has made Pacific engagement just the motif of her foreign ministership so far. Prime Minister has been deeply engaged with it. I've been deeply engaged with the Pacific. On your specific question, I find when I sit down with my Pacific colleagues, these are very constructive, reasonable conversations. So 1.1, obviously, it's a sea change because we're 0.1 having the conversation, which is a rather big step forward. It shouldn't really be, but it is. Secondly, when I talk to Pacific colleagues, whether they're serving ministers or perform a president, some prime ministers who take an active role in this, which I deeply respect, and I say, well, here's what we are doing. Here's the just let's put the headlines aside for a moment. Here's what the government is actually doing. And I stepped in through our safeguard reforms, our rewiring the nation, our 82% renewables by 2030 target, and on the safeguard reforms, just what it means with the 215 biggest emitters. All the things we're doing, and I point out that our target is 43% emission reduction by 2030. And I know some people say, oh, yeah, well, it should be 50% or 75% or whatever. And I don't mean to dismiss that. I get and respect that point of view. But when I actually explain just what a big task it is to get to 43%, it is actually a big job in 85 months. 2030 sounds like, oh, it's years away. We can plan all that. Eight years for a big change like this is buggeral. It is a really, we are starting far too late for a 2030 target, but we have no choice because we're only elected in 2022. But 43% is a big ask. It's actually ambitious. The safeguards reforms are, that's a big lever to be pulling an important one. Rewiring the nation, $20 billion worth of expenditure to get up to 82% renewables. That's a big job within 85 months. And when I very genuinely, when I talk Pacific leaders through this, they say, oh, geez, you actually are right. You actually are doing a heavy lift in Australia. And I find that conversation just go very well. And to your point about exports, when I say, well, look, we are working with our coal communities and being honest with them about the future and pointing out that 80% of our trading partners are committed to net zero. So the world is changing. So we do need to diversify these economies and create new jobs in traditional energy areas so that as this change inevitably unfolds and we are honest with the people of Central Queensland and the Hunter Valley about this, which our predecessors were not, again, the Pacific leaders say, yes, I completely get that. I completely get your approach. And we'll come back to those two policies you flagged specifically, which is the safeguard and rewiring the nation. I've got several questions on both. But I want to start with the issue of, well, quite a long moment, which is energy prices. Obviously this was all supercharged. Well it's sort of come in steps, hasn't it? The ACCC warned that bills would go up. Then we had the Treasury forecast, revised Treasury forecast, 56% increase this year and over, well, by the end of next year in terms of expressing that most accurately. Now we've heard for several weeks now about a regulatory intervention that the government is working up. It sounds based on what you're all saying with your various sort of emphasis and nuances that it'll be something like a mandatory gas code, some sort of price mechanism, some sort of east coast gas storage or gas reservation, something in that hemisphere, and then something on electricity prices. What? Well, look, what we are doing is saying, this is obviously, we completely understand the importance and the urgency of the task. Gas is selling at double what it did in December, which is not that long ago. Cold is almost double what it was selling at in December per ton. So this is a cost of living energy crisis, which is caused by elevated fossil fuel prices. Just to be clear, I know you're not, this wasn't directly to your question, but I can't let the moment go without making a point before I get onto answering your question. There are some who say, and it's the usual suspects, the right wing commentators and right wing politicians are saying, oh, look, see what happens when you're up to rely on renewables. When the price of gas in Europe is nine times what renewables are, yet some geniuses still seem to think this is caused by renewables. It is not. We have to call a line under that line. This is caused by elevated gas and coal prices. Now, what does the government then do? What the government then does, Murph, is work carefully through the options. Methodically. Methodically, you've heard us say before, but it also happens to be true. Well, it's also important. It's also important. I mean, if I can say to you, the regulatory architecture around energy prices is very complicated. I mean, if you're starting from scratch, you probably wouldn't design it this way. You know, there's state powers, federal powers. We've got AEMO, the operator, we've got the Australian Energy Regulator. We've got the ACCC. You've got ministerial powers. You've got, you know, you've got to check through your constitutional powers. So that's point one. Point two, you've then got to be satisfied that what you do will work. We are not going to announce a package and then say, oh, and we'll wait and see if it works. So that has got to be a very rigorous process. And we're not, again, just going to sort of say, oh, well, there's lots of bad headlines. We better whack an announcement out there. That's just not how this government works. I know there's a hunger for the detail. I get that from you and your listeners and all your colleagues here in the press gallery. But we are not going to sort of say, well, we are desperate. You know, we're getting questions in Parliament, so we better whack an answer out there. We will announce our package not a day later than we are very confident that we've done all the due diligence and work, but not a day before either. But conceptually, again, and I mean, I know this is, you think I'm just sort of trying to work around the non-answer, which I guess, you know, full disclosure I am. But I'm also interested, though. I mean, I can sort of see the gas elements of it, although I mean, I can't obviously see the full picture. The electricity elements I struggle with because there's already a de facto price cap in electricity. If you fiddle with that too much, you are potentially imperiling retailers. I know they're not the most popular people on the planet. No, no, but you need to be careful. I mean, at no point sending, you know, putting pressure. I mean, this is in the cabinet room, so I can't sort of talk through all the options and all the pros and cons. But all I can say is that, you know, we are very alive to the obligation as to ensure that these prices, which are caused by Vladimir Putin, you know, and by, you know, 10 years of policy function here, but by the war in Ukraine, which is saying every government around the world grapple with this all very similar. I talk to my international colleagues and the campaign notes. It's a very similar story, right? So we then need to come up with an elegant, carefully designed, properly constituted policy response which deals with the various elements. People sort of say, oh, you got to do a gas, got to do a gas. Well, you know, the coal forms the energy price a lot of the time. So I'm not saying it's, you know, all the for the coal, but you've got to have a holistic approach. Yeah. And that's what we will do. And just one last one, the states, I'm interested, obviously, Daniel Andrews and Peter Malinowskas in South Australia, both variously sort of fiddling at the margins of, you know, the state moving back into the electricity sector, because obviously it'd be a hell of a lot easier to control prices if the government owned the generators. So given that we are, I mean, it's sort of funny, you know, I've had policy conversations over a very long period of time, Chris, and it's sort of, you know, we're so far off, you know, first best policy at this point, it's sort of like you can't even see it through a telescope. Like, you know, five years ago, you and I would have laughed if we had thought about reversing privatizations. But are we in that territory? I don't think that's so much about prices. I think the Victorian announcement and you know, Peter Malinowskas' plans for a green hydrogen state owned power plant, for example, a sort of that's more about saying, well, this renewable energy investment task is so big that there's room for private sector and government and we don't think private sector can do it alone. So you don't think it's a sort of slow unscrambling of the aircraft? Well, I don't think it's about prices primarily. I think it's about renewable energy is the cheapest form of energy. So more renewables in the system makes lower prices and we need more government investment renewable energy. And I think, you know, be very frank, I think people in Victoria look at Queensland where they are still state owned and think, well, that's very handy. You know, the Queensland government's got its hands on the levers and making big decisions about renewable energy and thinking, well, we don't have those levers anymore. That'd be nice to have. I think it's more about that. Yeah, but it's sort of interesting, though, the point being, are they trying to put their hands back on the levers? But anyway, let's go to rewiring the nation now. So obviously this has been a, you know, the sort of political contention about this is starting to build up. Now, again, for people who don't know about this policy, this is the government's plan basically to build high voltage transmission infrastructure basically to kind of bolt renewables into the grid. So for people who have never heard about this policy and don't understand it, just a few quick questions. How do you actually execute this? Who owns the infrastructure? Who builds it? How can you resolve capacity constraints that everybody knows about in any sort of construction project at this point in time? And is there a risk of gold plating, which is the old argument in electricity, right? Because the whole direction in the power grid in Australia over the last several years has been towards distributed energy. And by that, I mean solar panels on people's rooms rather than people building mega power plants. So give us this sort of... Sure. Well, let's work back. Let's take the questions to reverse order. There's no risk of gold plating. Gold plating was, if there ever was gold plating, was not about transmission. It was about poles and wires, which the little poles and wires, if I could use that term, not the big transmission. The big transmission. Yeah. Now, the reason there's no transition without transmission is because renewable energy is spread more widely across the country. So everybody's sensible in the energy system. Everybody's sensible thinks we need more transmission because you've got to get the renewable energy around the grid more efficiently. And people say, oh, the wind doesn't always blow and the sun doesn't always shine. Well, it's normally blowing or shining somewhere in the grid. If it's not blowing and shining in Adelaide, it's probably blowing and shining in Brisbane. And you need an efficient system to get the energy around the grid. And renewable energy is spread... I won't answer that question, but renewable energy is sort of more spread around the country than coal and gas, which tends to be more geographically clumped. So it's an engineering question. Correct. Okay. Now, as to who owns it, Dan, when answering who owns it... So first of all, what is re-routing the nation? Rerowing the nation is a $20 billion fund to co-invest with other people to get the transmission built. Now, who owns the transmission will vary from project to project. So take, for example, MarinusLink, which is the big one, for right or for wrong, for some people call me crazy and some people would be right, but for right or for wrong, we did the most difficult, complicated, most important one first, which is MarinusLink. This is one that your listeners, our listeners probably will have heard talked about over the last 10 years, because it gets talked about a lot. Nobody's actually done anything about building it until we came along and we said, well, enough talk, let's get it done. So MarinusLink, for example, will be owned jointly between Victoria, Tasmania and the Commonwealth on behalf of the Australian people. So that's the second and third links between Tasmania and the mainland. There's one link at the moment, this will be the second and third link. And that's important because Tasmania has already got 100% renewables and they can get to 200% renewables, but there's no point in getting to 200% renewables unless they can send the power of mainland and they need more links to do it. Very important, big deal, very complicated. I don't mind telling you, when we started, Victoria, Tasmania and the Commonwealth were a fair way away in our starting position, some negotiations. Everybody agreed it was a good idea that somebody else should pay for. That's why it hasn't been built for the last 10 years. We came in and said, well, okay, well, we come to the table with some substantial cash here, but I need you guys to step up a bit too. And we got there and very good faith and very good discussions with my colleagues, Lily Diem, Rosio and Victoria and Guy Barnett in Tasmania. But other projects will be different, okay? Because you've got projects where the private sector is interested, like, you know, I don't want to sort of go through each project and who's interested. But you know, you've got big transmission companies like Transgrid who are working on projects in conjunction with state governments where we can come in and we can either take an equity stake or we can lend money or we can... So there's going to be various options. Yeah, well, you can de-risk in a regulatory sense. Correct. So there'll be some... It is the government getting back into this space and I'm unashamed and unapologetic about that because we need to. But it's not also about saying, well, there's no role for the private sector here, of course. This will be a genuine partnership. And what about super funds? Oh, look, well, I mean, they may well invest, but they won't be... I don't envision them sort of having direct ownership of a particular line. They're more likely to sort of work with somebody like a Transgrid or an AUSNED or something and provide capital in some form or other rather than saying, well, this particular line is owned by CBUS. I don't sort of... What do you mean? What do you mean? You know, people doing the shape. Correct. People doing the industry super fund shape. Correct, yes. Okay, the safeguard mechanism, which again, for if you don't speak fluent safeguard, bless you all. I guarantee you will by the end of the next three years. But basically this is an Abbott era mechanism which the new government has adopted. And the simple explanation is it's a mechanism to reduce pollution in the industrial sector. So big players, smelters and people who pollute a lot. It's a mechanism to do that. In the past it hasn't worked. The proposal is to make it work. Right? So that's the sort of potted version of the safeguard mechanism history. Now we've seen some conceptual stuff. We've seen a discussion paper. We've seen a lot of players making submissions saying, you know, predictably, please don't hurt us. You know, please let the taxpayers pick up the entire tab for this. Sorry, that's a bit unfair. There's a bit of that. I wouldn't... That's a bit unfair. It is a bit unfair. There's 240 submissions and I've got to say most of them, I've read all of them, you know, with highlights and post-it notes and what have you. Most of them are very constructive. They've got their own point of view and they're arguing the best interests of their industry and that's actually their job. Like I get that. But most... There's a few who are a bit, you know, this shouldn't apply to us. But by and large as well if you're going to do this, we think this is the best way and I, you know, I welcome that feedback. Yeah, well no, I know, I'm being a bit flippant. But so first question is when will we see the government response to that discussion paper? This year, this year I'm working through it. As I said, there's 240 submissions. There's a lot of different views in those submissions. There's submissions from peak climate groups and environmental groups which I've been through very closely. There's submissions from all the industry groups. In some cases, MIRF, the biggest contradiction is not between those two groups. It's between industry groups because, you know, different models suit different industries better. So that's the collision point I'm coming to, I guess. Yeah, so there's about 10... I mean, you know, we went to the election with this policy. We said we would do this. We're doing it. It was recommended by the Business Council, backed by the Australian Industry Group and ACI. So this is a, you know, a good policy. But there's a lot of detail which can only be worked through sensibly in government with the resources of the department, etc. And we're doing that. And so there's about 10 or 11 decision points that we need to make about detailed design. And you haven't done that yet. In the process of doing that, you know, and I'll be ranking recommendations to the Prime Minister and Cabinet through a proper process. Yeah. Talking to them about the pros and cons. MIRF, I'll just say this, you know, when I come out and announce it, the world in which everybody says, geez, Bowen got all those decisions right, in my view does not exist. Of course, you know, everybody has different views. But what I'm working on is a good policy package, right, which achieves real emissions reductions, but also doesn't close industries down and say, well, we don't want you here. You know, and the emissions just go somewhere else. That's not a sensible outcome. What we want is a sensible outcome working with industry to reduce their emissions, really reduce their emissions in a sensible way, recognising that every sector is different. You know, there are some sectors, to be fair to people, just to be very clear, there are some sectors where abatement is more difficult, where the technology is further away than others, you know, where they're working on it. But, you know, in a particular industry, when the industry says we'd love to reduce emissions, but the technology is probably five years away, there are some instances, not all, there are some instances where that is correct. So therefore you have to work that through. Right, the beauty of the safeguard mechanism, why I recommended to my party, we keep the architecture is because it does enable you to, it's not a one size fits all, right, it does enable you to at least have some flexibility. You've got to have one policy framework, but there is the opportunity to say, well, you know, we're going to do it this way. And this will apply in this sector in this particular form, in this sector in a slightly different form, it's the same policy framework. And interestingly, well, two quick questions on this. I have asked you this question before, but I'm still puzzled by it. Because the electricity generators are normally in the safeguard, but not really. That's correct. Right. Wouldn't it be a lot easier and potentially cheaper in terms of trading credits and all of that sort of stuff if electricity was in and properly in? I don't think so, because you have a different regime for electricity. Electricity is really about, I mean, the electricity companies by and large, not only are they know what to do, right? They know they need to move to renewables and to varying degrees, they are moving to renewables. But then they say quite rightly, but we don't have enough transmission to get it to the system. They have transmission grids congested. The rules aren't there. So it's a different set of problems for electricity, as opposed to the safeguard mechanism facilities, which are, as you said, you know, an aluminium smelter, a coal mine, a gas facility, the two airlines, different set of problems. I still hanker for an economy wide solution, forgive me. I know that's ridiculous. We're so far away from that. Interestingly, just last one on safeguard, interestingly, some of the business groups are now calling for a carbon border adjustment mechanism after, you know, sort of 12 months, oh, sort of screaming as if this would be the worst thing that ever happened. But that was actually happening to us rather than us making that happen to others. You got any interest in that? Well, I don't mind telling you. That was in a lot of the submissions, which I found surprising. I had to sit down. I was quite, yes. You know, tickle me pink. Gosh, me. There you go. It was a sort of sea change because you're right. Eight months ago, there was these sea bands, carbon water adjustment mechanism, carbon tariffs, they're a terrible thing. And Australia was calling for other countries not to do them. The government was. We weren't. The government was. Now we have such a sea change in policy approach that now people are saying, well, maybe Australia should do one of those. So I think that's interesting. I'm not here to preempt what we say, but the fact that it was a common submission from several industry groups and some environmental groups and climate groups. Now it's a big thing. You know, I'm not here to suggest we could get this up and running by 1 July 2023. The sea band. This is a big change. But I continue to work through the issues. Well, it's sort of one way of dealing with the old emissions intensive trade expos arguments. Yeah, some of the industries point out that, well, if we're competing, if we have this regime, we're competing with countries that don't have a regime. One way you could do with that is a carbon tariff. And the rhetoric pre-election from you guys was no more onerous restrictions here than elsewhere. Yeah. And making sure that that industries, you know, we want industries in Australia reducing our emissions and we want them still in Australia. There is. Oh, God, I know I said one last, but there is one more I need to put to you just on the safeguard because most of it you can do via regulation, but you will need legislation for the credit mechanism. Now, what happens if that hits the fence? Well, I mean, it could easily. Right. It could easily. I'd be hopeful that it doesn't because it actually that's one area with the Liberal Party. It was their policy in government. They just never got around to doing it. But why would they give it to you? Well, because it was their policy. Right. So if they say, well, it was a wonderful policy. You're invoking reason. But yes, call me old fashioned. So, you know, and business and industry are very strongly supportive of this. If the Liberal Party wants to do the old up yours to business and industry and say, well, was our policy, but it's not now because we crank it with the world, they'll have to explain that the greens. Oh, I don't want to speak for the greens, but the environmental movement by and large does not object to this. You know, so for our listeners, what it basically means is if you're a facility that does really well and reduces your emissions, you should you can then generate what we call a safeguard credit and you can sell that to a facility which is struggling. Most people think that's a good idea, including in the environmental movement, providing you've got the right regime and checks and balances. Now, the Greens have sort of said that they are open to supporting the safeguard mechanism and they want to see the detail. I don't blame them for that. It's not unreasonable for them to want to see the detail. The bill is quite separate to the regulation that I'll issue. And then for those who don't know the finer sort of details of how regulation goes, it can be disallowed by the parliament, but it's a straight vote. They can't move amendments. They either say, yes, I like this regulation or no, we're voting against it. So basically I'll be putting it to the Senate and saying, here's what we're doing. You can vote to support the government in reducing emissions or you can vote against the government in reducing emissions. But having said that again, it's the sort of government we are, but there's consultation, there's engagement, there's issues we work through. And so look, it's a bit like the climate bill. When you and I and every other person in this building was asking me about the climate bill, I'm going to get it through. Well, we talk it through. We engage with people, we sensible government of adults. I cannot guarantee any particular result, but I'm confident that people of goodwill will do the right thing and we'll be okay. It's interesting because it's sort of, I guess, pressure will be building up when you think about the grains, like base pressure will be building. Yeah. I mean, you know, again, I fully understand they've got to work through their issues. They've got to set the details. I engage, you know, there's plenty of areas of disagreement between me and the grains, but you can sit down and engage in areas where you can agree. And again, you know, I would deal with people of good faith across the parliament here. Actually you came to this portfolio for a couple of reasons. You were interested in the scale of the economic transformation that's associated with climate policy. And I think you wanted to give yourself a red hot chance to actually pull climate policy out of the bin fire. Right. So, you know, there were lots of statements in the lead up to the election by the leader by yourself. You know, we're going to win the climate wars. Yeah, there are some good news to that effect. Are you going to win the climate wars? Red hot go, as you said. It takes more than one side to want to win the climate wars, of course. Yeah. That's the point. I mean, I guess what I'm trying to say to translate is cost of living weaponises climate action again. Yeah, of course. It makes it more difficult, like just living in the real world here, when climate jumps the fence from being, you know, an issue of science, evidence and all of that stuff to a cost of living. And the usual suspects go saying, oh, this is all the costs of renewables, you know, and the people write op eds and News Limited saying, oh, there's only one reason for power prices as renewables, which is a lie, of course. I'm sure it gets weaponised. But I would say this, I mean, we are again, we'll engage with people of good faith. Yes. People on the other side want to play the sort of cheap old politics last decade. They can double down on that strategy if they want to. I mean, I don't think it worked particularly well for them in the last. It worked for them for a while. I can see that, you know, get them in office for 10 years. It did not work in the end. But you know, we passed the climate bill through, as I recall, the House 89 to 55. That's not unanimous, but it's a pretty big good step forward, you know, compared to not discounting the election result. And in the Senate, 37 votes to 30. By Senate standards, that's a landslide. So yeah. And ultimately, sometimes it takes time, you know, take the other big labor reforms, you know, of I don't want to sort of take us down memory lane too much, but Medicare, for example, was highly contested, highly contested. John Howard went to the 1997 election saying he was going to abolish Medicare. Eventually, they just came to terms with it and said, okay, we're going to tap them out here. The Labor Party's won this one. Medicare is too popular. It's too sensible. We're going to support it. It takes a long term labor government, you know, to do that, which we hope to be. You know, in due course, the Labor Party says, oh, well, we've tried this climate change denial and delay. It's not working. We might just have to get with the program. It might take them longer than you and I would like and our listeners would like, but maybe they'll get there. But you know, we will, we can do what we can do. Sensible climate policy supported by business. Finally, real action. It's a contentious area. You know, we get criticism from, you know, the left from the greens. We get criticism from the right. We will just continue with good sensible policy. That's all you can do at the end of the day. Chris, thank you for making the time. I know it's a very busy week this week, parliamentary week, and you're heading into, you know, a week where you won't sit. I don't think your bum will hit a chair for the next. Well, I'm on the airplane for a while. Well, that's true. I was just thinking about running for one end of that. Once you land at a conference like COP, you do not stop. That's true. It's all go, go, go. So thank you for that. I want to thank you, Alison Chan, for producing this week thanks to Molly Glassie, who's EP. While Miles Martagnone is on leave, thank you to you guys for listening. And I will actually be travelling with the Prime Minister next week, so we may only get the podcast about polling next week rather than the usual interview anyway. We'll see how we go. Thanks for listening. You know the drill. Tell your mates. I'll see you next week. Bye. Bye.