 This is The Guardian. Hello, lovely people and welcome. This is Australian Politics and I'm Catherine Murphy. And with me in the podcast, Amy Ramekes, Paul Karp, Daniel Hurd, Sarah Mutt, Josh Butler, and we are answering your campaign questions. The campaign has moved into single digit days. We are in the final stretch. Next week we will have the acceleration that will be the coalition campaign launch in Queensland. We will have costings. We will have final speeches to the National Press Club, and then we will have the acceleration of the campaigns. And next week we will have Paul Karp and Josh Butler out on the road with the leaders. Exciting. Oh, well, I think it'll be a little bit crazy. Anyway, on to the questions again. Congratulations, masses of questions again. So if you do not have your question in the lineup today, I apologise in advance. So, Sarah, we're going to start with you and Megan. Megan wants to know if the LNP got back in, how do you think their cabinet would look like an operate, given the number of divisions and scandal plagued MPs? Do you actually think they could function? Thanks for the question. Well, I think we've talked about on this part previously, it probably depends on how that cabinet looks and who's in there. And does Josh Freinerberg win his seat? Does Peter Dutton win his seat? Who is the obviously if they win, Morrison stays the prime minister. But, you know, if Josh doesn't win his seat, then who becomes the treasurer? Reshuffle ensues. Obviously, reshuffles have the potential to get people's noses out of joint. We had confirmation from the prime minister. So today or last night, I don't know, my brain doesn't work anymore. Last night. And that the Alan Tudge would return as education minister. Yeah, I believe it was. And to be honest, I've been so confused by the Tudge in out, maybe is he a minister, not a minister? Is he got a warrant? He hasn't got a warrant. I actually didn't sort of clock immediately that that was actually used, that that Morrison had confirmed that he was back. He would definitely be back as education minister. Yes, Schrodinger's minister. Yes. Yes. So Courtney Gould, I think, describes him as a cabinet backbencher. Anyway, so will they function? I mean, obviously, Barnaby Joyce is still going to be in there. And that always brings with it its own challenges. I suspect that they would function about as well as they have done in the past. Probably a good way to leave it. And I'll just throw in a supplementary because I know there was one Twitter question to this effect that didn't quite make the line up. But let's do it quickly. Let's just imagine a scenario where both Josh Frydenberg and Peter Dutton lose their seats. I think that's impossible, by the way. I don't think it is. Famous last words. Highly unlikely. But in that scenario, the coalition loses. This is Megan's scenario, the coalition wins. Let's do the losers one very quickly. So in the event Morrison loses and the two leadership aspirants lose their seats, quickly, rapid fire predictions. Who's the leader of the Liberal Party? Amy? Stuart Robert. Paul Fletcher, just a safe pair of hands. Okay. Okay. Daniel? I don't know. Susan Lee. Okay. There we go. This is good. Okay. So I've actually committed a fair bit of brain time thinking about this. And I think it's either Angus Taylor or Dantian. Yeah, I think Taylor. I think Taylor. Would Morrison go for another go around? He loses. If it's a title, actually, they get like 73 seats or something. Would they let him? Doesn't feel short and stick around for a second time. Would they let him, is the question. But would he want to stick around? Well, that's, yes. He's only 50 something. He's not that old. I think they're already thinking in their minds, like, should we have changed later a few months ago? Because all these MPs are briefing on background. You know, people love me. They just take Morrison. Yeah, that is true. And they must be thinking, like, could we have done better with a different leader? Imagine a position leader, Scott Morrison. Would much change. I was going to say, how different would that actually be? Anyway, let's keep rolling. And obviously, we are on social media, all of us. We are very easy to track down. If you've got thoughts about who the next liberal leader will be in the event of a defeat of the Morrison government, do let us know. Anyway, moving on, Steph Durant, Sarah. Steph wants to know, with the UAP now confirming they will preference the coalition over Labor in most seats, do you think this has the potential to alter the election result? Well, Steph, I think definitely it has the potential, but only in the event that it is a tight election and that there are very close results in key marginal seats. And obviously, then yes, it can make a difference if we're talking, you know, a preference scramble and we're looking at seats that are decided by the last few hundred or thousand votes or something like that. There's been some study done at the last election where the UAP preferences made a difference. The analysis showed that if preferences had split 50-50 rather than I think it was the 65-35, that they ended up splitting and the only seat that would have stayed in Labor hands would have been the seat of Bass. It's questionable how much people follow the how to vote cards of minor parties, but there's an interesting number that if, say, you know, 10% of people follow the how to vote card, then you need a primary vote of 5% to make a 0.5% difference to a margin. So in a close contest, then obviously 0.5% is not nothing. I think one of the unknowns of this election, we don't know where that UAP vote is concentrated. So is it going to be consequential in a seat like McEwen or Parramatta or particularly some of those out of suburban seats that were particularly hard hit by lockdowns? So I think that is one of the unknowns in this election. But, you know, if it's if as the polls suggest Labor is on track for a, you know, modest majority, then it's unlikely to make a difference to the overall election result. But obviously anything and literally anything could happen. Yeah. And do people follow the cards to begin with? Because, you know, UAP has actually been more even handed in bagging both major parties this time in terms of their ads. Now, what they're directing on their cards is, you know, beneficial to the to the Liberal Party in key seats. But people have been absorbing these messages like put everyone last, you know, yeah, for so long, you know, are they following the card? Yeah, well, well, no, that's an interesting question. But it's also the flow of preferences in the targeted seats is different to the impression the UAP has been creating for months because, you know, there is a less beneficial preferencing arrangement for labor than than the coalition in the relevant seats. It's obviously in aggregate, it may it may well be, you know, as more as Clive Palmer and Craig Kelly flag. But anyway, there we go. So watch that space, Steph. Paul, you're up. And on the issue of the last 72 hours, which has been wages. So I'm not surprised we had a bunch of questions on wages this week from Carol Mansa to kick us off. She has three questions. How independent is the Fair Work Commission? How are its members appointed? And has the LNP stacked it with LNP leaning appointees? Paul. What the Fair Work Commission is the industrial umpire and the appointments to that are quasi judicial. So like a judge, they have tenure once you've been appointed to it. So you're quite independent, you know, once you get a gig on it. But bodies are only as as good as the processes of appointment. The coalition does have a very long streak of appointing people from employer backgrounds. So barristers or employment lawyers or in-house counsel that represent employers in the industrial relations matters. It is actually headed by Justice Ian Ross, who is a labor appointee, though. So although, you know, its numbers are quite stacked with, you know, employer backgrounds, it's headed by a labor appointee. And that gives him quite a lot of power. Like he decides the personnel of appeal panels in the major cases and is often criticized for, you know, managing to always constitute panels in major cases that have labor appointees in the majority. And the most important case the Fair Work Commission decides is the minimum wage, the annual minimum wage review. And that is decided by a seven person panel, three of whom are experts that are appointed for only five years by the government. And so they're all coalition appointees at the moment and four people that are the president and three people of his choosing. And last year it was four labor appointees and the three experts appointed by the coalition. So Justice Ross managed to convene a panel that had a majority of people that were labor appointees. And so related from Vicki Perry, who is from Montville in Queensland, how can someone on $200,000 be up for a $9,000 tax cut? And that is acceptable. But someone who is on 40 grand is perceived by some as greedy asking for a $2,000 pay rise, which will be fed immediately back into the economy by those just trying to make ends meet. So, you know, I think we understand the dynamic of that question, which is why is tax cuts okay and wage increases not? Well, I think it's just the political history of Labor having lost 2019 election on increasing a number of taxes. And then by the middle of the next year, the middle of 2019, when it was an Anthony Albanese-led opposition, they were just so browbeaten into having to approve this flat tax proposal for people earning between $45,000 and $200,000. Though, as you've noted, that is a big $9,000 tax cut for people at the top end there. So that's why that's a bipartisan issue, despite it being a huge blowout of $15.7 billion in its first year. But then, you know, Labor is being criticized for backing a 5.1% increase in the minimum wage, even though that is just a lot less money. Like, even if it were all 2.5 million workers who have their pay set by the national minimum and the award minimums at, you know, a dollar more an hour, $2,000 more a year, that's still only like $5 billion in comparison to the $15.7 billion for the first year of the Stage 3 tax cuts. So tax cuts are inflationary, but they're not really on the table at this election because Labor would be burned so badly last time. Now, Daniel, you're up. Justin O'Malley says, we all hear about how badly various defence procurement processes go astray or get stuffed up. We need new helicopters because the doors don't work properly with machine guns attached as just one example. There are many more that have been reported in various media over time. Over the years, it's been one procurement process mess up after another, a great financial impact for Australia also having an impact on defence readiness. Obviously Justin's been following the events closely. So my question is this, how is it that the Department of Defence keeps bungling these procurement processes? Very good question. I think there's a few factors at play. One is these defence projects have huge time spans. So, you know, by the time it becomes clear that it's been massively bungled, we might be two or three defence ministers down the track. So the time scales are long, so it's hard to sort of maintain accountability at a political level. The simplest way to purchase military equipment is off the shelf, the less risky way. But often politicians and also defence planners like to modify it, improve it, you know, we're going to get better capability. We're going to take this existing platform and make it better. And that introduces risk. So the audit officers actually analysed some of this stuff and looked at delays and they found that the more developmental a project is, the more likely it is to have slippage. So the schedule will blow out. So by that you mean the more of it that's actually produced in Australia or through some sovereign capability type situation, the higher the risk of bungal. It's more about if you're trying to change an existing design to incorporate extra elements or better elements. But of course, local industry content is part of the equation. Now I guess I might sort of, you mentioned helicopters as a sort of fable, as a sort of case study into how these things get bungled and the time scales involved. I thought I might take us back to, well, more than 15 years ago, 31st of August 2004. I'm going to read you the first line of an ABC News story. Border security has dominated day two of the federal election campaign with the government announcing a $1 billion defence contract for new army helicopters. Now this is the project that this person mentioned. This helicopter thing, when it was announced, it was signed off just before caretaker mode began and announced early in the campaign period, which sounds slightly familiar, I would say, in this campaign. And that, the Howard government stressed there'd be local defence industry jobs as part of it. Now let's fast forward a little bit to 2014. The audit office took a look at this project. By then we've had, it's gone from Prime Minister Howard to Prime Minister Rudd to Prime Minister Gillard to back to Rudd to Prime Minister Abbott. In 2014, we have the audit office explaining that the program is running four years behind schedule, the costs have mounted, there's some major problems with it. Now, very interesting is one of the reasons why it says that the major problems began in the period 2002-2006. The decision by the then Australian government in 2004, that was day two of the election campaign, to approve the acquisition of the MRH-90 aircraft, instead of the initial defence recommendation that the Black Hawk aircraft be acquired, has had significant implications. They didn't know how, they didn't know, unforeseen immaturity in the design and the high cost of sustaining the aircraft. Now one of the reasons that initial recommendation that was overturned is very interesting, is that in December, Peter Dutton announced that this MRH-90 aircraft is essentially going to be ditched and that they're going to ask the US for more Black Hawks. So we're back, we've sort of come full circle. To where we were in 2004. But this is an issue where it was announced just before, as an election campaign began, the original defence recommendation was overturned. There was definitely defence industry reasons for part of that. And then it takes years, years down the track for it all to catch up. And then who are you going to hold accountable? Yeah, oh, exactly. So, I mean, there is a major projects of concern process through defence, I think it was set up about 10 years ago. It really needs to be beefed up so there's sort of greater scrutiny on the projects that are running behind. Some sort of continuity of accountability, which is your point, that that's at the heart of the problem, is that there's not this continuity of accountability. And every time an election cycle happens, presto, we go on a new cycle of this, basically. That was a fun trip down memory lane. Exactly. You're here to deliver. It's not Paul Keating always pranks his clippings. He comes prepared this guy. Maybe in 20 years when we have the Orca submarines, we might go back to some of the coverage. 20 years, that's generous. No, Daniel is taking notes and naming names. That's all I'm saying. We'll be back here in 2045 in the podcast cave, talking about, remember back in 2022? Remember Prime Minister Morrison? Remember him? Cabinet papers. Have these been released yet? I don't think so. Thank you, Justin, for such a great question and thank you, Daniel, for such a great answer. Amy, you are up. We've got Mitch from Cleveland in Queensland. Great part of the world, as is Montville. Is this a Brisbane place? Yes. I'm sorry. Up just outside. Sorry, Mitch. It's fine. Sorry, Mitch. Sorry about that. Okay, Amy, my question for you, this is Mitch. How do you and other journalists assess the veracity of leaked internal party polling? They are no doubt leaked with an agenda. So how do you assess if the claimed polls are real? Good question. Very good question, Mitch. As you say, they are always leaked with an agenda. So the best thing to do or what I do is look at what that agenda is and then just cross-reference it. So nobody comes to you with polling for no reason. No one's just like, oh, look what I found. Would you be interested in having a look at this for no reason? Because I'm actually mandatory. Yes, because I'm just a good person. I want you to know this. They do it if it's bad to try and either scare up support by basically just saying you could lose this MP to a protest vote. Is that really what you want to try and grab that underdog status? Or they do it to try and imbue confidence. Like if your candidate is a confidence player, maybe they need to think that they're doing great in the polls. And the best way to do that is to have it in the news. Then you go to the other side and they'll tell you what their polling is and it never really matches up. And if it does, then you know it's legit. If it doesn't, then it's okay. What is the agenda here? But then you have to look at it. Well, what is the methodology for this poll? Does it actually matter in terms of the contest? What am I adding to public interest by publishing this information? Is it just a line in the story? Is it just good for context for us to know what it is that the campaign is wanting to put out about their own campaign or their own electorate? Often revealing on that score. Yeah, very revealing. So you just weigh all of that up and then you talk to your political editor who's still in the podcast in 2027. And you just make a judgment from that. So basically, unless you know the methodology, unless you know the sample, unless you know how they did it and why they are releasing it, it doesn't really count for much. Beautifully done. Josh, you're up. Aaron Sparat. Now, this is a good question from Aaron. He says, hi, team. Interesting question. I've always pondered around the election campaigns. We have politicians from various parties roaming around the country making various announcements and commitments of funding, but the hitch is they need to win. Do you feel the general public understands all the commitments announced rely on said party or party member winning and following through on the announcements? Are there ever any circumstances where announcements are binding to the incoming party, even if it's the party who didn't announce the particular grant or whatever it is? That is a really good question. I guess this is sort of what a lot of these local campaigns are about, isn't it? Like, I've committed to this and my opponent hasn't. Or if you vote for the Liberals or vote for Labor or whoever, we'll get this done and our opponents can't get this done. It's been interesting. Both sides have been quick to match announcements that have been made by the other side. Big time health announcements and those sort of things that even down to very small local things like within hours or very minutes afterwards, there'll be a tweet or a Facebook post or a press release, something like that. Oh, we will do this as well. I guess in terms of if your party loses, will it stay on or will commitment still happen? If stuff's already in train, I guess, if there's a big development happening. But I guess there are big infrastructure examples when they've torn up a contract or they've ripped stuff out of the ground and turned it around. Yeah, those big contracts, it doesn't happen so often. Not so often, but it does. I guess once it's sort of started, it's much harder. This is like a Spamore and Daniel sort of patch, but one of the other easy big attacks of the campaign has been, oh, Scott Morrison ripped up this $5 billion contract for the French submarines and even in the debate last night, I think. There are examples where this does that. That was liberal, not liberal, labor changing government, but same sort of vibe. Same principle. It does happen. Sarah, you might have some thoughts because you're so deep in the data about election spending this time. I'm swimming in a pork vat. Yeah, I mean, I think it's pretty extraordinary the amount of money that is being committed to these local projects. And obviously, Nick Evershed and the data team have pulled together this phenomenal piece of data gathering using machine learning and artificial intelligence and all sorts of things that I don't understand how they work. But basically combing through the Facebook pages where a lot of these announcements are made. And I think there's a lot of things that press releases don't go out. Ministers and shadow ministers may be named, but they don't put out the press releases. It's all just through social media. And it's kind of staggering how many small projects there are things like playground upgrades and dog parks and stuff that the federal governments probably shouldn't be funding. But both sides are doing it. And I think there's also a bunch of interesting stuff in terms of how targeted some of these things are. And I think parties are now very data driven and they're looking at all the votes they can possibly win and targeting particular areas, particular booths. Sporting clubs are obviously massive beneficiaries of this type of spending. Well, and in the story you wrote this week, I hope listeners caught up with that one. There's a crossover between sports grants, projects and facilities that are being funded additionally in the campaign, right? Yeah, absolutely. And obviously with sports rights, there was a lot of criticism from the auditor general about a lack of a merit-based process for those projects to be awarded. We've had a look through the election promises and a bunch of those clubs where we had very low merit scores for particular projects are in line for more election cash. So, in some ways during the election period, those sorts of grant, any sort of rigorous independent process that is normally applied to those sorts of grants is completely out the window and parties can just promise whatever the hell they like. So, but I think it's interesting just in terms of how much they matter and obviously incumbents have a huge advantage when they've been working with particular sporting groups or ethnic groups. You know, when the MPs office is often the point of contact for grant applications, you know, Barnaby Joyce was pretty blatant when he was like, oh, voters love port barrelling because we deliver what they want. And Glenn is very jiggly and said something similar. Patricia McKinsey this week said something like, oh, you know what you'd call port barrelling? That's what I call delivering for the Nationals. Yeah, and Morrison was asked about it a couple of days ago and he was like, we're going to keep doing it. So, it is a vexed issue, but there is like literally some seats are getting half a billion dollars in commitment. Like half a billion dollars. It is just astronomical. Yeah. And if only we all lived in marginal seats. No, exactly. There is actually supposed to be a difference between an election commitment that is only going to be delivered if that party is elected and then something for which funding is already committed. Yes. It's been one of the coalitions of Morrison government sort of innovations is to blur the lines of these things. So sports rots and the commuter car parks were both examples where they'd actually already set up the whole program and committed the funding. Even though in the case of the commuter car parks, they were announced as if they were election commitments and treated it by the department as if that were the case. But the ANL said, no, you'd actually already committed this money before going into the election campaign. And I think just quickly, I think, didn't this whole sports rots thing get kicked off by Rebecca Sharkey following up a giant check in the election campaign? Yeah, in the election campaign. Yeah, in the election campaign. Yeah, yeah. Gave the check a giant check and she went, why is the local member not here? Exactly. Now, quickly, I want to do a question from Tim Fitzsimmons. And then there's three questions that we're going to all spitball on to end this episode. But Tim has asked, do media outlets undertake a review of their election campaign coverage, similar to the sorts of reviews that the major parties undertake on their campaigns after an election? If not, should media outlets do this given the vital role we play in a democracy also came to hear the team's thoughts on the future role media can and should play in strengthening our democracy during elections? A subject that's very dear to all of our hearts. Just I won't give you chapter and verse, Tim, but just a simple answer to your question. Well, we certainly do. Yes, I mean, we don't get Jay Wetherill to come and do it for us. But we do actually review from campaign to campaign what we've covered, how much it's been read, how much it's been shared, whether or not we think it's had an impact or not. And what we learn from campaign to campaign informs our coverage for the next campaign. I mean, part of it is a function of resources, because obviously the first campaign I covered for Guardian Australia, there were very few employees. We're now in a very different position so we can do all kinds of iterations on audio and video and data and other things. And I think sort of the number of your question is, are we self critical? Well, yes, is the answer. We certainly are. I could be amazed at how it's like. None of us sleep at night. No, exactly. Oh my God, yes. The government rending never stops. No, but we do try and assess it from election to election. And if you actually followed our coverage from election to election, you might see some core concepts that we iterate from election to election. I just draw to your attention, Tim, if you've read our Anywhere But Canberra series in this election campaign, which the reporters on this part of all contributed to, we've sort of done a version of that in every campaign. But every campaign, we tweak it slightly just to see whether or not it has the most impact basically for readers. And what role do we play in strengthening democracy? Well, I think this is a very short, simple, straight answer to that question. Tell the truth, Tim. That's what we try and do. So let's roll on to the final three questions. And I loved two of these particularly. Let's do Diane's first. Diane wants to know why no one's talking about COVID numbers and the deaths. 19 in 1, nursing home in WA, not a single P. What is going on? Diane's obviously worried. People are just over COVID, aren't we? Like, I think that's just the main thing. People, both Morrison and Albanese are kind of running with a bit of a positive. Elle Morrison is saying bad days behind us, good days ahead. Albo is saying good days now, better days ahead. They don't want to talk about COVID and that sort of thing, which I think is sad. I mean, you look at these numbers today, I think Australia's got one of the highest per capita numbers of COVID in the whole world at the moment. And per capita number of recorded deaths. Obviously, there's places where they're not recording numbers as accurately, but on recorded numbers, some of the highest in the whole world. And no one's really talking about it. Even today, Morrison was in Tasmania and they were wearing masks inside, which is the first time in a while I've seen either of them wearing a mask, which I sort of took me back for a second. But yeah. I mean, you had a thought. I mean, we're well on our way to 10,000 deaths in Australia, which is something that not so long ago, people thought the modelling was crazy about because the first couple of years of the pandemic, the main years when we were all locked down, there was just over 2000 deaths. Well, we've already doubled that by April. We're heading towards 7,000, I think we were 7,600 today. And it's only going to get worse because I mean, I do the live coverage. I look at all of the numbers each day, 23 in New South Wales, 17 in Victoria, 11 in Queensland. And it comes through and I put them up. But people, as Josh said, wanting to move on from the pandemic. And I think it just must be terrifying if you're immunocompromised, just going to the shops because you're taking your life into your own hands every time that you do that. And the fact that the simplest thing we can do is just wear a mask in those essential service areas. And even that seems too much. I mean, we've had a culture war over it. It must just be so disheartening when you look at us as a society. It is odd when we think about how singular our focus was for such a long time. And yet, you know, journalistically, we've kind of moved past and I think journalistically, we've moved past largely because of, you know, society wants to move past, which is Josh's point. I mean, maybe it'll normalise a bit after the campaign. It could be a bit of a bandwidth issue. But yeah, I think that's the best answer we can give you, Diane. It's not a happy one. So upbeat first, you know, second last question and then random in the last one, which is why I loved it. Fergus McGuire says, my question isn't directly about the election. I wanted to ask a hopefully positive question, given so much of this campaign has been depressing. So who do we see as the most talented and effective figures in Australian politics today and why? And Fergus is prompting us, all sides parties, including those up and coming. Who's got somebody that they want to upvote? I've got someone. I'll spook for Alex Greenwich, the independent MP for Sydney in the New South Wales State Parliament. A very impressive record in terms of both having run a national campaign in the same sex marriage postal survey, but also providing very good, you know, local independent representation, working with a Liberal government that for most of the time, it's been a liberal moderate premier, and working cross party. There's a very good group of cross party MPs that have worked on, you know, LGBTI issues in law reform in New South Wales and other socially progressive things like euthanasia. And he's been a part of that grouping. So I think he's done a very good job. Okay, who else we upvoting? Election wise, I think Jason Clare has been one of the more effective. The bolter? Yeah, he's come from no, not from no, that's unkind to Jason. But I think like you look at some of the breakout sort of moments of this campaign, I think a lot of people would have heard some of the zingers that he's made and that sort of thing. But I think I'm more serious about he sort of was one who stood up on the first morning when Albanese had COVID and sort of tried to calm the horses and that sort of thing. But I think it's a really interesting and important portfolio in housing as well. Like they've made some of his policies, you know, it was a centerpiece of the campaign launch and I think he had a couple of policies in Albanese various budget replies over the last couple of years. So that's a tough area for labor, I think they dropped negative gearing and capital gains and those sort of policies after the last election. So I think it's interesting they've sort of made some interesting sort of financial policies around housing in this time. And I think Jason Clare has been at the middle of it. Okay, Sarah, you got one. I mean, just on that, I think it's kind of it's a bit weird, isn't it? That probably the most talented and effective person on the labor side is not leading the labor pay. Like, no, I mean, I'm just gonna assume Albanese is too busy this week to listen to this. But I think we've seen Jim Chalmers, we've seen Jason Clare, I think Tanya Plibersek is always a very strong and effective communicator. I don't think Albanese is their best communicator and he has been reliant on the team around him to sell some of their messages. So I think that's just, you know, side note observation. I think on both sides, there's really good people who came in in 2019. I know the question sort of asked about up and coming MPs, you know, people like Josh Burns and Annika Wells on the labor side, I think on the liberal side, you've had some quality people like Katie Allen and Celia Hammond, and obviously Bridget Archer has really made a name for herself as a strong local member particularly. So Amy, is she going to say something? No, no, I was just gonna say on your point about Albanese and not necessarily being their most effective communicator. I absolutely agree with that. But I think his strength has always been as a consensus leader. And I think that's kind of been the point of gathering part of this team around him and having them actually step up and speak like he seemed during the, you know, the 2010 parliament, you know, he was the one who was helping to broker the deals and he's really good at that sort of stuff behind the microphone, I think rather than in front of it. Just for a non-major party person, I would point out that Helen Haynes in Indi followed in the footsteps of Kathy McGowan. And just say, sorry, just slight diversion, has the brightest consonants in the parliament. Just say, the woman's elocution is second to none. Yeah, and she's been on your pod before, I know. But she, you know, she's an example of someone who's, you know, really focused on the task and takes representing her constituents seriously. And interestingly, Indi, we hadn't, you know, before McGowan came along, we hadn't possibly thought of as something that would be an independent held seat. But people in that regional electorate have decided to stick with that approach. I was just going to say, there's no teal independence without the voices of movement. Yes, yeah, exactly. If you've got anyone in particular, you want to, oh, sorry, Daniel. I was just going to say, despite all the mornings of, you know, hellfire, if independence, more independents get elected to the parliament, I'm pretty sure Helen Haynes gets along with people across the parties and pursues interests of her electorate. I was going to go back and say Cathy McGowan and the voices of movement because of just the impact that they have had on our parliament. We've seen just the strength of the crossbench after Cathy McGowan's election, which continued with Helen Haynes. Then we saw Rebecca Sharkey join in Zali Stegel. And they've really laid the groundwork for people to think different about their democracy in Australia. And I think that's really, really important. And if you're ancient like me, you also remember Rob Oakeshot and Tony Windsor in that parliament. I'll just say quickly, Sarah's always already nominated her, but she's in my mind because we're recording on Thursday and I saw her today in a press conference in Tasmania, Bridget Archer, I think has, you know, her model's herself on Judy Moylan, who is a liberal politician, I greatly admire. I agree with this list. I mean, Annika Wells is another standout from Brisbane, I'm fully confident that Annika Wells one day will be the Prime Minister of Australia. She's got that sort of, you know, grip and grin absolutely down pat. But yeah, Bridget Archer was quite moved at a mental health announcement today. And I just want to take the opportunity of recognising that she is a very decent human being. So let's do that. Now, our random question to finish from Ruby, who has, as she says, a left field question, completely hypothetical, so not offended if you don't want to touch it, but we are touching it, Ruby. The Queen has been very ill recently and even declined to speak at the opening of the parliament for the first time. How would the passing of the monarch, monarch, forgive me, impact the election in the final week in a bit? Just to be clear, we're not wishing the Queen dead, but Ruby's question is how would that impact things? Amy, thoughts? Well, first I need to say that Rihanna is my queen, along with Dolly Parton being my God. So I think that if Elizabeth did pass on, that we would see a pretty big nostalgic vote probably turn out in the last week of the election campaign. You'd see quite a lot from the Conservatives speaking about tradition and nostalgia and all the rest of it, which does tend to help the Liberal Party vote. But having said that, Bob Hawke passed away in the final week of the Labour campaign in 2019 and that ended up putting a bit of a stop to the Labour campaign. We know where anyone just tooled down and started picking up the beers in honour of Hawkey and that had an impact against them. So who knows? It's hard to predict. Well, it would be a big thing because Charles would be our king. That would be the first thing to happen. And how would that make people feel about a republic? I think that would be the other interesting corollary of that. And I assume Scott Morrison would have to go to a funeral. So, I mean, it is sort of an interesting question as to the actual what happens on it. I gather an emergency session of parliament would have to be called and we have a new head of state declared. So I think if it did happen, it would be quite a spanner in the works. It would be a thing. Yes, Daniel? I guess the only thing I'd add is that Labour, this election, has a less forward leaning approach towards a republic. Dave Albanese has prioritised an indigenous voice to parliament. So just in the back of our heads, I guess that's, you know, it's not as if he's going to this election with a, you know, we're going to race to end ties with the motto key. Yes, yes, that's true. Probably would spark a massive culture war, let's face it. Oh, well, totally. We are a strike. What doesn't? I think the conservative side would try and start that culture war because there appear to be behind in the polls. But I think it would be like Tony Abbott rocking up on day one of the same sex marriage post postal server and trying to make a vote about same sex marriage into a broader, if you don't like political correctness, you know, try to rope in all these other issues. But really, that's not the question that people were asked. And I think the death of the Queen would be similar in that they would try and make it stand for, you know, the scary future versus the nostalgia. But like people's first order issue is cost of living. And you know, even the death, even the death, like a proxy, are we going to become a republic of the election? I think even the death of the Queen would raise it from being a 20th order issue to a, you know, a 16th order issue is what it would do. Don't forget in terms of culture wars, a lot of the people in the right culture war space don't particularly like Charles for his advocacy on net zero and sustainable agriculture and so on. Maybe they maybe the woke police would be urging Charles to be reining it in. Yeah, yeah, I think we do. Yeah, should we like knock on water like throw some salt over our shoulder or something like this is a bad duty. I don't know. But I want to I want to thank Ruby because that one was a genuine can of worms. Anyway, thank you so much for joining us, you lovely people and you lovely listeners. As we said, we are entering the final final bit of the election campaign. Thank you to my wonderful team who I don't know how any of us are still upright, but we are and I'm so grateful to them. And I'm sure the listeners are too. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of this show. We will try and do one more of these. I think we will try and do one for the Saturday of Election Day. So store up your questions, get them to us until then hydrate pecs next. We'll talk to you then.