 This is The Guardian. So the journalists are there for that little scrap. It might not be much, but it might just be a little lead or a little tidbit that you can follow up. And the leaders are doing it, not because they like journalists, I want to socialise with journalists. They're doing it because they're trying to soften you up. I mean, both sides have an agenda here. Hello, lovely putters. You're on Australian Politics. I'm Catherine Murphy, and with me this week... Daniel Hurst. Josh Butler. Paul Karp. Sarah Martin. And we are answering your campaign questions. Sorry about that. We are a bit worried that we sound like the Wiggles. But anyway, the point of these discussions during the campaign is exactly as advertised. We are answering your campaign questions. There'll be different groupings of us on different weeks. And I just up front want to thank everybody for the quality of the questions. Every time we do these episodes, I'm blown away by what comes in. So without further ado, we're going to start. And Sarah's going to kick us off, I think, with this discussion. So different variations. Same question. Marcus asks, I think one of the pressing issues or questions will be about Albo's first day gaffe. And will it make any significant difference in six weeks' time? Then Stephen's version of this is, is it your experience that the effect of the campaign overcomes what happens in the periods in between? I.e. periods in government, right? So it's sort of, you know, mistakes and missteps in campaigns more important than the three years that precede it. Mel Padgett's version of this question is a little bit sharper. What's more important, the previous nine years of coalition incompetence in government or Albo's electioneer incompetence? That's his version of it. And then Fabian, this is a sort of a media process question, which we'll get into. The media just reports breathlessly on the thing of the last 24 hours, usually confected nonsense. Is this unavoidable? Is there a way we can get broader reporting on political issues of substance during election campaigns? So, Sarah, why don't we just write that down? Yes. It's a lot. It's a lot. But there's but they're all good questions. Yeah, they're all very good questions. I think I think firstly and most importantly, in answer to Mal's question, absolutely the, you know, the performance of the government over the past nine years and the substance of that is far more important than Albo's electioneer incompetence. But and there's a big but there. I guess Albo's electioneer incompetence, it may determine whether or not labor forms government. So in many ways, it's it's it's just as important because if you want to get rid of an incompetent government, you need to have a competent opposition and someone who can actually win an election campaign. So I think as much as many people would like this to not be important, it was a slip up and it was a bad slip up. And it was a terrible opening to Labor's campaign. I guess the the biggest problem with it is is I know a lot of people just say it's a terrible gotcha question. Everyone should move along and pretend it never happened. But it was important, I think, for a number of reasons. One, they were very important key economic indicators when you're campaigning on jobs and wage growth, etc. and cost of living pressures. They're you know, you should know them. You should you should 100 percent know them if you want to be leader of the country, whether it was a brain fade, whatever it was. It was it was an unfortunate error. I guess the other part of that is we have spent much of the last three years going very hard on the government for a number of things. And as has the Labor Party and rightly so. You know, I don't think anyone would suggest that most of the journalists in the press gallery and particularly not in our office have gone soft on Scott Morrison. So part of the I guess the flip side to that is as Labor has very successfully turned the screws on the government and drawn the public's attention to their failings, there hasn't been a lot of opportunity for Albanese to really, I guess, get himself match fit in terms of answering difficult questions from the media. And that's what we're going to get every day in the campaign. It's sort of a tricky one because it is important that it isn't important. It is important because it may influence voters who are just tuning in to the contest. Don't underestimate the level of disengagement among people who for the past three years have been, you know, obviously, enduring a pandemic, but also living their lives and not paying much attention to politics. So the thing that has penetrated is Scott Morrison's, you know, unpopular. We know that. But at the moment, the government is trying to frame this as a choice with consequences and not a referendum on the past nine years. So if people are tuning in and looking at that choice, Albanese really needs to be putting on his, you know, his best show right now, whether or not it makes any difference in six weeks time. We'll see how the campaign goes. But it might be might with some people who are just tuning in. So but, you know, it's we've still got thirty seven days to go. Yes. But who's counting? Yes, Paul. I would say that it takes a long time for people's impression of politicians to be baked in. And we've all just come back from touring marginal seats. And in Western Australia, people's baked in negative impression of Morrison goes back a long way to the bushfires, to going to Hawaii, to being missing in action or trying to thwart the premiers in an earlier stage of the covid pandemic with the W.A. border. So it takes a long time for their impression to be baked in. But in Albo's misstep, I think the concern is if the gaffe reinforces a pre-existing impression that people have. And for Albo, some of the negatives that people mention are like his speech as increasing their perception of his weakness. You mean the way he speaks? The way he speaks. And so to have gaffes if you stick your tongue out, if you say to indicate that you've made an error as unfair as it might seem, that can confirm an impression of weakness in some people. And the other thing is the what I think is a fiction. But many people think, you know, labor is necessarily worse on the economy. And so it can play into that impression that voters have. It is only one day that they shouldn't panic. If every day of the campaign was like that, then, you know, yes, that could that's something that could lose you the election. But if you can pick up his performance from there, it's not the end of the world, even if it is a really bad day. And what about this point about I mean, obviously, Albenizi Stumble was triggered by a question, obviously, didn't just walk in there and just say, hi, everyone. I don't know what the unemployment rate is. Right. So that goes to the point of the way elections are reported and the way people conduct themselves in these daily press conferences. Daniel, Josh, what are your thoughts about the opening week as a campaign? I mean, obviously, we've all we're all on social media. We all live in communities that be live seminar about how people have conducted themselves out at us, how we've conducted ourselves. What do you think about the opening week? I mean, the interesting thing for me is like for weeks or for months, Albenizi has been saying, I'm match fit. I'm ready to go. Like he was like goading Scott Morrison to call the election in that sort of like interregnum period where like there was sort of nothing happening in the last couple of weeks. And on the first day of the first week of the presser of the campaign, I mean, like he had this big stumble and Sarah sort of touched on it a bit in her in what she said. Like he didn't really hold that many press conferences down here in Canberra. He didn't really expose himself to the scrutiny of the specialist politics reporters. Like he did a lot of press conference and he made this big value of saying, oh, I do press conferences every day. I've done a press conference almost every day since January or whatever. But they've often been in short little presses like out in like regional areas or in the cities where there aren't the specialist politics reporters that can like snap the unemployment number out of the air or know all the facts and figures. Like he didn't really expose myself to the press and not to say like the press gallery, the best reporters, but like he didn't expose itself to that glare that he's now getting every single day that he's now having to cop. And I mean, like I think today on Thursday, like he was seen a bit more assured and yesterday was a bit more assured and that sort of thing as well. But like he hasn't really put himself out there that much. And, you know, he keeps saying he's match fit. I mean, you know, to borrow a different sort of sporting metaphor, maybe it's like the sprinter who comes to the blocks and stumbles out of the blocks. So the gun goes off sort of thing like he's got a bit of a way to catch up now. Yeah, Daniel, I think it looked bad on TV that first day. It used to be the be all and end all of campaigns, how it came across on the TV news each night. I'm not so sure. I think that's possibly diminishing slightly. But I mean, well, it used to be like what it looked like on the TV news that night. I think there's a lot of other channels being used now to get the message across and narrow casting and so on. I think it was a one day story. It pressed on to the next day. I think that went on a bit too much. But, you know, it was important. Just quickly say something. Of course. Please. One thing that struck me today when Morrison was talking about the boat policy, turnback policy, and he was talking about him being the architect of that and whatnot. It just sort of struck me that this guy has for quite a number of years had the blow torches turned on him. Like he is very used to media going him day in, day out. Like I think you can't underestimate that experience in a campaign. Like he, you know, even though he's got journalists asking him hard questions, and we saw today, particularly with the Integrity Commission, people were going pretty hard at him and rightly so. But he is so used to that. He is so used to that level of intensity. And I don't think Albo is. I think it's also in a funny way, you know, forgive me, sort of injecting an element of the human condition into this conversation, because we all think of professional politics as being this sort of robotic presentation or art form or capacity. Right. That because we're so used to this message discipline in modern politics, where people just stand up and say whatever the hell the message is, regardless of what comes in. Right. I think there are observable temperamental differences between Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese that have been very that this first week have kind of really exposed. And I don't mean that in the sense of the political arguments that they're running, like who's both of them, Albanese and Morrison are saying, we're not like each other. Vote for me. Right. In different ways. But I think it's sort of to Sarah's point that Scott Morrison is a machine. He is a campaign machine in terms of that concept of campaigners message war. Right. He just goes out there like a tractor in low gear. It doesn't matter what hits him. Boom. He's going right. And that's I don't know. There's an extraordinary level of confidence that sits behind behind that. Well, did you see the sorry, the body language expert today in the tabloids? I miss Albo looked a little bit nervous and Morrison's body language is that he's he's like about to eat someone. No, well, that's the thing. It's the difference. And it's sort of like we we because you sort of think, you know, it's all it's also staged like personalities and quirks and stuff make no difference because it's all kind of mechanized. But anyway, it's just a bit whimsy, which I won't bore anybody with any longer. I just think it's interesting. We've seen two different characters in a lot of sort of ways, I think, in the first week of the campaign. Now, Paul, you're going to lead us on the next two. We've got a question from Jeremy Cowan. What do you think the significance of having Paul in Hanson's One Nation and UAP candidates running in every lower house seat across Australia this time? What's the significance of that? Is there any sense of how much support their campaigns will have this time around, which obviously opens up a conversation for us about what's going to, you know, the whole sort of other vote in this election? And the implications of it. And then from Jack Jones, we're going to get to ICAC, which we all mentioned a minute ago. You know, where is it and why isn't it here? So, Paul, let's let's do others. Well, I think it guarantees that there will be a home for the protest vote, not only in your Senate vote, but also in the lower house. And Palmer United Party did do that last time, did field candidates everywhere last time and spent, you know, 70 billion dollars on the campaign and no one got elected in the Senate or the House. So it doesn't guarantee that anyone's going to get elected, but it does guarantee that both those parties will be around Australia. Two parties run very different campaigns. I mean, the United Australia Party is prepared to spend big, you know, the advertising is everywhere on TV and YouTube. And so their candidates benefit from that. One nation has more of a ground up type model where the candidates are expected to pitch in, you know, a few thousand dollars to pay for their own core flutes and all the rest of it in an effort that ends up helping the Senate ticket a lot more than them personally. So those two parties run very different types of campaigns. What sort of impact they'll have? Well, there is very high disaffection at the moment because of, you know, the pandemic in some states, very extensive mandates forcing people to get vaccinated if they wanted to keep their job in other places like Sydney and Melbourne, extensive lockdowns to beat coronavirus. So we are expecting that in parts in some regions and in Sydney and Melbourne, heavily locked down, you know, double digit returns for the Palmer United Party and, you know, in parts in Queensland, double digit for one nation. So they are going to be a force to be reckoned with. What remains to be seen is what those voters then do with their preferences because, you know, Palmer's out there threatening to go against every incumbent MP to just try and flip every seat as a way to protest. You know, there might be preference deals that don't direct your vote but do encourage people to vote a particular way. And, you know, when I was in WA, I met lots of people who hated vaccine mandates who said they weren't going to vote for either Albanese or Scott Morrison. They just weren't going to fill in the whole ballot, even though they know that's what you have to do to pass to cast a valid vote. So I think there could be a big informal protest vote as well. Yeah, just on that point that you make there Paul about the preferences, like I think UAP has almost said that they definitely will preference against every sitting member and put Labor and Liberal in the Greens last. The One Nation started talking about that as well. I've just seen One Nation Justice start talking about that similar thing. They haven't kind of made it quite as clear or like explicit as Clive Palmer has, but they've started talking about the same thing as well, which would be really interesting to see what those results look like. You know, in some of those areas like, you know, Western Sydney that had those big lockdowns, I think as Paul touched on, like you will see some good results out there for UAP. Like I'm not sure what One Nation will look like, but One Nation I think is sort of almost being crowded out of that conversation by the UAP and One Nation sort of running like Paul Henson has talked heaps in the last couple of days about the anti, the trans women in sport bill, for instance, like they're sort of going towards those more like, you know, like UAP seems to just be running solely on vaccines and lockdowns at the moment and some vague stuff about, we'll bring Australia back to prosperity or whatever, but like, and fix your home line. All these sort of like, just strange grab bags of things. Yeah, by submarines off the shelf from the USA. But like One Nation is now going into this, like, I think even deeper sort of culture war, you know, hard right liberal stuff. So I'd be interested to see how much structure it gets. Yeah, that is very interesting. Again, based on my travels, Northwest Tasmania, the person off this list is Jackie Lambie and her preferences. Honestly, I think she will be critical in Northwest Tasmania in terms of determining those two very marginal seats, Bass and Braden. And later certainly wants her preferences and if and if is successful in attracting them, that might be the difference actually in those two seats. Anyway, IKAC, where is it, guys? Oh, God, go on, Paul. Where is the IKAC? Where is it? Well, Scott Morrison has broken his promise from the 2019 election to introduce one. He developed a model that no one liked and then didn't even introduce the bill to parliament in this most recent term. And he's blaming Labor for that, saying if he can't get bipartisan support, he won't introduce it. And the latest update is this week, he said that, you know, he's not even committed to do it in the next term. And journals were really sticking it to him today, saying what, even if you win a majority, even if you could pass it without Labor support, you're not committing to do it. And he just says it needs to be bipartisan. So he's found a way to to claim to support an integrity commission and never do very much about it. Yeah, exactly. So the short answer to the question, where's the where's the IKAC if Scott Morrison wins? Nowhere. I mean, it's pretty extraordinary if you just go back a bit and remember that it was former Attorney General Christian Porter who had one round of consultations on this. There was an exposure draft released. Michaelia Cash then had another round of negotiations and consultations on this. There was a revised bill taken to Cabinet. Cash was rolled and because Morrison and others in Cabinet didn't like some elements of the revised bill and then it was shelved. So a lot of time has gone into a bill that no one is happy with and won't go anywhere. Yeah. And in the process, I mean, Morrison, it's basically set up and he set up an alibi for inaction on this. And institutions matter, accountability matters. Basically, in the process, he's happy to to undermine trust in New South Wales. It body the IKAC and record as he calls it. It's just I think this might be a sleeper issue. It's certainly not the top issue for voters necessarily at the current time. But I think the sort of it's a bad look to be backing away. Well, basically having broken election promise and also not committing to do it in the next term doesn't look good. And these sorts of bodies are important in raising trust in our politics. Beautifully landed. Josh, you're up. So we have a question from Wendy Bacon, which is sort of one of the questions of the week in terms of media process. And I'm just saying to listeners, whenever we do these episodes, there is always a load of media process questions. We'll always try to get to a couple of them, but we also need to focus on other issues. But this is important. So we'll discuss it. Wendy Bacon, who's a journalist, journalism academic, asks how to guard the and reporters see a politician supply drinks events. This relates to some controversy this week about reporters drinking after hours with the campaigns. And then we've got two questions on Alan Tudge, the Schrödinger's minister. So from the first from Danielle, the PM says the Tudge affair is a private matter. But can he actually find out about this settlement if he wants? So that's the first question. Second is and related, why is the taxpayer footing the bill for Tudge and why isn't the mainstream media media process talking more about this? How can he possibly be still a cabinet minister? How can he possibly stand for re-election? So let's do drinks first. All right. Well, I guess the first one to say is like, obviously, we're all in Canberra and none of us are on the bus. And I don't think any of our colleagues are on the bus this week from the Guardian. It is a really interesting question. It does bring up a lot of I guess, sort of the bare bones, like basic ethical things about journalism and like the closeness in which especially I guess in this unique sort of politics role in Parliament House. Like we do have very close contact and exposure to other journalists and politicians and staffers and people working in politics and that sort of thing. I've only traveled on one campaign in 2019. I traveled on the buses of Bill Shorten and Scott Morrison. And I'm thinking back on neither of those buses, I think, were there supplied drinks with the Prime Minister or the opposition leader. But it's my understanding that at these events this week and I'm happy to be corrected if anyone out there was at these events. But I wasn't. I only heard from people who were there that the Labour and Liberal parties put on drinks. Al Binesi had a drinks event with journalists on the Monday night, which was I thought quite interesting right after he'd had this big gaffe. And I was always talk about all the media is being made to Albo like he had a drink with them six hours later. And then Morrison on Tuesday night did a similar thing that was the subject of this TikTok video that went on all the news. It is really interesting. And there is like there's that line that you draw. I mean, I talked to a lot of journalists this week who sort of fobbed it off and said, oh, you know, I wouldn't be influenced by a free schooner and a handshake with the Prime Minister. And I think most journalists would say that probably all journalists would say that. But it's not just the actual bias that you can be shown to be having. I think a lot of it, especially in the world now, where there is so much accountability, not just in politics, but in media. And like you say, if we're getting all these process questions each week, obviously it's I think a big issue of interest for a lot of people. Like it's not just the actual bias. I think it's like the appearance of bias as well. Yep. You know, I've been to events like this, not on the campaign buses, but other events. I mean, they have drinks events at Christmas and what have you. And, you know, labor and liberal supply the drinks and people go to them. I've been to other events where I've decided not to take the free drinks and pay for your own drinks at the bar. I mean, everyone has their own line that you draw. I don't know what the best answer to this question is. I think it's one of those lines that you have to draw for yourself ethically as a journalist each way. But, yeah, I was I was really interested by the conversation that's kicked off this week about how how widely people were just surprised by this. I mean, hypothetically, I wonder how how the reaction on social media would have been if say in that TikTok video, we swap out Scott Morrison, put the album in easy. People would have been quite as upset or enraged or blown away that the opposition leaders hold holding drinks for journalists rather than the PM. But that's not to say, you know, all both sides do it. I'm not trying to both sides here, but that's just a thought. No, no, no. It's an interesting thought exercise, too. What did the rest of us think about all this? They also sometimes supply lollies on the bus. That's true, actually. I remember actually one day on the campaign in 2007. Yes, I am that old. Being on the rut bus and to raise rain appeared with like the most massive crate of fish and chips I've ever seen, like somewhere on two dollars a check. Basically, yeah, it was it was quite so anyway. Sorry. Back to back to back to focusing about the ethics of this. Paul, you have a thought. I was just going to say that there are all these other ways that politicians shower journalists with favor and giving them drops in terms of exclusive access to information that others don't don't have ahead of time. And, you know, all this effort that journalists go into to cultivate close relationships with politicians that the outrage is very interesting because it's like a drink at a bar. It's like the tip of the iceberg of how close the political and media class are. It almost seems bizarre to be concerned about that. But I do agree with Josh in terms of the appearance of bias and just the symbolism. It's like, yeah, sure, it's only it's only a few schooners, but then it's also only a few schooners for you to pay for your own damn drink. So like, why sell out for such a small for such a small thing? Exactly. I can see Daniel Lindbrig up. Just just that it's, you know, part of journalism is to try to get information and part of that is is building contacts and part of that is meeting with people in these sorts of events. But I think norms are changing. I think there used to be a lot more alcohol actually, I gather in an election campaigns or in terms of how politics and media was done. Certainly true. I think norms are changing. It's becoming more important for journalists to be accountable to their to their audiences as well. And I think, you know, it the reason this has had some traction online is because it overlays with this view that political reporting can sometimes be too focused on process type things rather than accountability journalism and rather than sort of substantive policy issues. Can I say one more thing? Because this is a bit of an intervention before. Like Paul says, like, obviously, we all go out and network and we have coffees with people and we, you know, whatever. I think there is a slightly different aspect when it's in the middle of a campaign. Like if you're traveling on the bus every day, we Scott Morrison or Anthony Albanese or whoever it is, like you're having that constant exposure all day long. And like it is a really weird environment in that you're with these people 24 hours a day. And like, obviously, like the reporters aren't, you know, shooting the shit with Albo on the bus 24 hours a day. But like you're, you know, crossing paths at the hotel or whatever. I think it is a bit different in the campaign when it's like, you know, to use a sporting metaphor against like game time. Like it's it's a bit different. I think that I've been so struggling with this all week, but I think it is a bit different when it's campaign time. Yeah, I think they're trying to build a sort of sort of loyalty that makes it harder to then really dig the knife in or you or if you do have a tough line of questioning that they object to that you maybe subconsciously, the journalists will entertain their criticism of that slightly more than they would if they didn't feel like they had a relationship of any sort with you. And it's a bit like someone tying a little bracelet around your wrist in order to try and sell you something in a marketplace. It's like the monetary value of it is nothing, but it's like, is it a foot in the door of like starting a conversation about trying to influence your work? No, of course it is. I mean, of course, that's exactly what they're trying to do. Yeah. But I think if we're talking about the transactional laws, nature of journalism and politics and the sort of symbiosis, which, you know, I know, like it does exist. There's always a calculation to be made. So, you know, the journalists are there in the hope that they might get a little scrap, a little crumb of information that might be a story from advisor or from talking to the politician themselves. Or, you know, you got to remember there's an entourage traveling with these leaders as well. So the journalists are there for that little scrap. It might not be much, but it might just be a little lead or a little tidbit that you can follow up. And the leaders are doing it not because they like journalists and want to socialize with journalists. They're doing it because they're trying to soften you up. I mean, both sides have an agenda here. Yeah. Well, beautifully expressed. And I just should use this interlude just before we come back to touch, which we must absolutely do, just to remind you that that we have a campaign catch up podcast every day. I addressed some thoughts on this question earlier in the week and we'll be doing that every day, not around media process questions every day, but around issues of the campaign. So if you haven't subscribed to that, make sure you do. Josh, touch hit me with it. Can you remind me of the question? Yes, of course I can. Yes, I know we went away there. But anyway, it's important and thank you all for the frankness in that. Now, the two touch questions were I'll summarize. Can the PM find out about this payout if he wants to? And the second one is why are taxpayers footing the bill for it? Well, OK, the PM is an interesting one. I did a lot of digging around this this week. I think legitimately Scott Morrison probably doesn't know about this. And obviously the finance minister, something Birmingham, he's the finance department minister. He said he didn't know about it either. I tend to believe that that's true. The question is, did they decide not to know about this? Did they decline a briefing? Did they? What have you? Sure. When this will go out. But I'm actually sort of waiting on some response back on the finance department on the very thing still. It is one of these things where it's in this not not gray area, but there's sort of two competing interests. I mean, this is a private workplace matter between a person and their employer, which is what it basically boils down to. And in most instances in the outside politics world, this stuff probably wouldn't be made public. It would be very rightly kept private. Some of the allegations that were made were quite serious ones that go to I don't think this sort of stuff should be sent out willy nilly by government departments to people who ask for the information. But the flip side of that, I think, goes to the other part of the question is like, this is a lot of money. This is in excess of five hundred thousand dollars. This payment, when you add on the legal fees that we paid, the cost of the Vivian Tom investigation. This is probably going to get towards, if not maybe exceed a million dollars. It's a lot of money of taxpayer money and it's taxpayer money that's being set at the door on this. I don't think it really passes the sniff test, pub test, whatever you want to call it to say that, oh, you know, we're not going to say anything like it's a million bucks. And this minister, maybe more than one minister, has been been accused of being a bad boss or of running an office not in the way that they should be running it. Yeah. Well, the settlement relates to alleged conduct that occurred in the offices. So, yeah, it's not like this just fell out of the sky on someone. So I think the second part of the question, the second question of like, you know, why isn't it a biggest story? I mean, we sort of touched on it a bit earlier of like, you know, why Albo's gaff sort of dominated the week. I mean, it's this thing where there is a campaign going on and there is limited air time or column insurance or whatever it is. I mean, it hasn't really made the TV news too much. I don't think I mean, Morrison and Birmingham have been asked about it in a lot of TV and radio interviews, but their response and it's a very good dead bat response is to say that, oh, we don't know about it. It's a it's a private matter. I've got no oversight on it that at all. And it's, you know, unless the PM or the minister makes a comment says, oh, we know about this. Here's the details. XYZ like it does take a bit of digging and we've been doing the digging and it's been difficult. Well, and what Josh is describing is basically, I mean, one of the reason why it disappears is because it's a void unless we can unearth new facts because, you know, all of these protagonists are trying to create the void. And the immediacy, you know, like that, on the one hand, you've got a difficult story versus the immediacy of, oh, Albo stuck his tongue out or Morrison said this or, you know, someone wore a funny hat on the campaign trial. Like it's, you know, again, like the competing media interests or the journalism news cycle and that sort of thing. I mean, you know, there are competing stories and, you know, things are happening on the campaign trail and it's exciting. Like that's part of the time immemorial dynamic. Now, Daniel, last one, you're up. So from Dai, the liberals talk up their national security credentials, but the least port of Darwin to to Chinese. Sorry, the sentence construction is not great here. But anyway, concerns about the least port of Darwin to to Chinese. They've dropped the ball on the Solomon Islands. They've cut aid. They've ignored climate change in the region. There's made jokes about water lapping at doors. They've opened the door to China. Do wonders, why is this mismanagement not getting more attention? Yeah, it's important. Coalition has been running sort of pushing a hard national security message. I've heard from coalition MPs on the ground that national security is not actually getting as much traction as they might have thought that the economy and cost of living is definitely what voters are talking about when they're talking to candidates and MPs. So, you know, the national security, the tough national security line that that doesn't been running has not really captured attention given the cost of living pressures and the economic focus. I've been told Solomon Islands is is, you know, it's a massive, you know, the Australian government is panicking about this because of what it could lead to down the track in Solomon Islands. Solomon Island says, you know, don't tell us what to do. We're a sovereign country. It's really insulting to tell us that we don't know what we're entering into or that we're being naive. They see that as quite insulting. So it's a tricky one. We saw the minister for the Pacific, Zed Seldja, go to Honeiara for meetings this week in the middle of a campaign, which is quite unusual. It had apparently Labor was consulted ahead of time and gave the go ahead for that trip, given caretaker conventions. But you know, basically, Australia, the US, New Zealand and others are really panicking about this. And, you know, we're talking we've spoke, talked a lot lately about submarines that might be available possibly by 2040 if we ever get a domestic nuclear industry. nuclear industry. Yeah, and it's fair to say that there are gaps in the here and now. And the Pacific Island nations have repeatedly told Australia that our biggest security concern is climate change. This is existential for us. Australia rhetorically has said we take your concerns seriously, but hasn't committed to deep cuts that are what's needed to protect some of these islands. So there's a whole lot of competing things there. The Port of Darwin lease, apparently the review is still a live issue, even though defence has contributed its part to it. It was the country, Liberal Party government in the Northern Territory that granted that 99 year lease, continued to be a sore. In the last five years, the strategic outlook has deteriorated and that will continue to be an issue. Yeah, and it's interesting, as you say, if that's the record, if that's the observable record why there was this initial attempt, I suppose, to inject national security into the political contest. But as you say, they saw it, the coalition saw it as something that they could target Labor over. But our listeners could observe that in the last five or six weeks, Morrison has not repeated things like mentoring a candidate or that Labor's the Chinese Communist Party's pick completely backed off that. They're not going to stop saying that Labor cut defence spending and so on. But it's a sign that that hasn't cut through, that that went a bit too far, that was that institutional pushback, that he's dialled that back. Yeah, anyway, very interesting. Well, that's all we've got time for this week. I want to thank my team. Close listeners may have observed that Amy Ramicus is not amongst us on this episode, but trust us, she will be back. She's back from leave, helming the live blog, obviously, and will be part of these conversations as well. Thank you to you guys, as you can see, that quality of the questions is really outstanding for all the people who sent questions. And there were there were loads of you. Apologies, we can't get to all of them in every episode. And we do prefer to limit the numbers so that we can drill into the questions you've asked and give us out and give you our best answers. So, you know, thank you, keep it coming. We'll be back next Saturday with another episode, which we'll set up for you online ahead of time. You can send us the questions. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of this show. Thank you to you guys for listening, engaging with and caring about politics and your democracy. This is, you know, these are really important periods. Lean in, engage, look at the substance of things, assess your vote carefully. It's such a... What is it? Precious. Precious. Exactly. Thank you, Daniel. It's exactly what it is. So anyway, we'll be doing our best to inform you as best we can over the next few weeks. See you next Saturday.