 There's something shifting now. The platitudes just aren't going to work. There's so much work to be done and I do feel as though at times I just cannot believe that after 10 years it's so similar. And you know when you hear Gillard say I'm proud that I've made it easier for the next woman and the woman after that and the woman after that. I think that's true but by how many inches? Hello lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You're with Catherine Murphy, the host and I'm political editor of Guardian Australia. And I'm delighted to have with me this week Tosca Luby who is a producer and a director with Northern Pictures. And for the purposes of this conversation is the director of the new documentary Strong Female Lead which is available I think on SBS streaming services and I think it went to air on Sunday Tosca right? Went to air on Sunday so it's already on demand. Yes on demand. Thank you. So anyway I've seen the documentary. It's amazing. I know a lot of people listening to the pod will have a similar view of that. But let's sort of start at the beginning. Why don't we start by you telling the listeners a little bit about what you've done previously and how that path leads you to making a documentary about the Gillard years. Well, yeah probably like most documentarians it's a pretty weird kind of path that I've taken to make a political documentary if you call it a political documentary. I actually started out in Natural History television. So I started out at the ABC Natural History Unit and we made all sorts of biopics about Australia and about about natural history. And from there I went on I moved over to WA where the ABC didn't have a kind of outfit that I could work with. So I became a freelancer and then did all sorts of independent documentaries about subjects as diverse as mesothelioma, aged care, the poaching of lions and tigers, child abduction. So yeah that's what documentary tends to do. You sort of become an expert in some field for a year and then you move on to something completely different. And then actually about six years ago I started at Northern Pictures and we do a lot of interesting stuff at Northern Pictures which is why I've stayed for so long. So we do Love on the Spectrum which I know a lot of people love. And then I actually did a big Natural History series there a few years ago called Magical Land of Oz which was another, it was 18 years since we'd done a sort of continent wide series. So that was an exciting project. And then last year we did See What You Made Me Do which is a series about domestic abuse that was also that went out on SBS and presented by Jess Hill. So yeah, strange path but the last couple of years I've certainly been delving into issues to do with women. And the Gillard project actually came out of us being shut down in the last lockdown. Suddenly we had to stop all filming on See What You Made Me Do. And for a long time the editor of this project Rachel Griss and Johns and I had fantasised about making a purely archival film about the Gillard years. And as soon as we got lockdown we said hey rather than yeah, either everyone becomes unemployed or we start this project. So SBS actually kind of bounced in very quickly and backed it. And that's what we did. We moved everything home and we had an archivist in her house, an assistant editor in his house, the editor in hers and myself and we just passed everything between us once a week and worked through what turned out to be, as you can imagine, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of hours of archive. So I was going to ask you about the archival method because often in documentaries it's a mix of archives and people talking to Canberra and people having retrospective feelings about things. One of the kind of powerful elements in the documentary is that it is literally live action events and no one's given the opportunity to sort of spiff up what they might have said in retrospect. So it's sort of like a time capsule and I mean that in the best sense. So was the archival method a function of lockdown or is that what you wanted to do even if the country hadn't gone into lockdown? No, that was absolutely what we wanted to do from the start. So it was, I mean the film has been compared to the final quarter and that is no accident. When that came out it said to us, yes, this can be done. We can get someone to back this. So we were thinking it might be hard to get a broadcaster on board as it so often is, especially on a project that's not following a formula that they're used to. And so after final quarter came out I thought, okay, there's our template, there's evidence that it can work. And that film of course was made by Ian Darling who was able to sort of support it himself. So, you know, it just goes to show that I kind of needed that to happen before I could even get a broadcaster onto it. And so we knew that the material was out there. It was then still a job of convincing everybody that we had a film in it. So people would say to me, look, I know that there were those signs at the Carbon Rally and I know that people said some nasty things but I don't know that you've got a whole film here. You've got a whole film, yes. Yeah. Before we recorded, I said to Tosca when we had a chat on the phone, it's one of the powerful things about this presentation of those facts of the Gillard era is that it's very compressed. It removes all of the other daily distractions of that political period and there were a lot of them. And it just, it compresses and focuses in on this one important theme of the Gillard Prime Ministership and that sort of, that gives it this power. I'm interested, was Julia Gillard involved at any point in the project? Did you tell her you were going to make this documentary? If so, how did she react? I'm interested in that. Yeah. So I was upfront from the very beginning because initially I thought I kind of needed her to be involved. As it turned out, we actually didn't and it was probably better that she wasn't for everybody's sake, I think. And when I say she wasn't, what she did do was supply us with anything that we needed. So she allowed me to speak very candidly to anybody I asked to speak to and didn't hold back on anybody. So everybody who worked with her was generally very loyal to her. In fact, someone said to me, once you've worked for Julia Gillard, you will always work for her. And so they always went to her first and asked for permission and she always gave it. So I had some great conversations to begin with, which helped me work out what we would chase archivally. And a lot of conversations along the lines of tell me about the moments that you remember that we may not know about. Tell me about things that happened that may not have been caught on camera that I might be able to find through some other form of media or through, you know, we initially it was a very broad basket that we were going after because I wasn't sure what we would incorporate, you know, as it turned out, tweets became very helpful. And, you know, it was kind of that early stage of social media. So it was kind of trying to work out what people were using back then and where people were communicating. And that was part of the archival process as well, to work out where everything was being said and what direction we should go in. Yeah, it's interesting that as a scaffolding methodology, because you do literally, as you said, you would just have such a wealth of content and then you've got to plot a storyline, you've got to plot a narrative arc through that wealth of content. So it's interesting to sort of get people's because I know exactly what you mean about staff from that period and the political staff are like that generally. But it's sort of like, in a way, they're good anchor points, because what they viscerally remember from those periods would be helpful to you in terms of constructing a narrative, I imagine. So what's the reaction to it been like? It's been pretty amazing. You know, whenever you make a film, you're never sure whether people are going to be into it. I mean, if you knew that, you'd be the most competent creator on the planet because you just really never know. But we had an inkling that people would be really struck by this. We certainly were. Even now, I get upset by it, even after watching it so many times. And the reaction has been really interesting in that the outpouring of love for Gillard. Then the other really interesting thing that's happened is a lot of LNP supporters who've come out and said, I'm so appalled and ashamed about my own party. That's been a surprise to me. I didn't think that that would happen. It's also been interesting that, for example, Julia Banks has come out very vocally, but no one from Labor has, including no women. I know that Kate Ellis has commented on it, but otherwise it's an interesting silence. Yeah, it is an interesting silence. What about in terms of that assembly of facts you spoke before about staff recollections as one means of plotting a storyline? I mean, I think you started as a journalist, didn't you? I think that's your background and it's obviously fine. Any journalist can tell you that you can assemble the same facts in five different ways and have five different stories. In fact, some diametrically opposed to the other. I know that sounds a strange concept for folks listening, but you can assemble so many different stories from the same facts. What's applied is a point of view that sort of steers a kind of coherence through the interpretation of those facts. When you started, notwithstanding your process of how to edit down the material, did you have a very strong story in your own mind that you wanted to tell through this documentary? I knew that it had to travel chronologically, which was the only spine that we had. Usually in any project that I would do, I create all the footage that I want to work with. Before I do that, I've got a really clear script and sense of story. You go out and you collect everything you need to create that. This was the opposite. I knew that somewhere out there in the ether, there was all this material that if you could come bring it all together and sieve through such a mess, there was a story in there for you somewhere. To begin with, it was really intimidating. I kind of thought, I just don't know where to start. This amazing editor who did this, and these films are editors' films. You need an incredibly competent editor. Rachel Gressin-Donnes is the best. She sort of said to me, right, we are starting with carbon techs. I was like, okay, okay. I had already plotted out all the chapters that I thought would hold the story for us. I knew that there were moments through the three years of her career that we would build a narrative around. We did, but a lot of those dropped out. Actually, initially, we made a trailer that was pretty easy because it was all just those really shocking moments like Kick Her To Death and a lot of those moments, the moments that people would be more familiar with. Did she go down to the chemist and buy her own tampons? Easy to string all those things together, but not easy to string it together over 70 minutes where you actually tell a story and there's a story arc. Actually, if you're to follow what is a workable story arc, we would finish at the end of the misogyny speech because that's where there's a victory and people can take that with them. It was very hard to continue the film beyond that point and bring your audience back down again. Actually, I've noticed in some of the tweets, some people have said I had to stop after the misogyny speech and just turn it off for a minute so I could just celebrate with her for a moment knowing that it was all going to go horribly wrong again. In observation before I ask you this question, what was striking to me back on that compression point and the removal of debris and distraction was Julia Gillard's emotion. Because at the time reporting that, she was such a stoic figure. There were so few points where the frustration or the burden she was carrying in terms of all of the crass sexism, that was largely invisible because she is a very stoic character, but her emotion is very much at the fore in this documentary, which was just really interesting actually, just that was so much more visible in compressed form. We've talked a little bit about the reaction to it, about people needing that break at the end of the misogyny speech before ponying up for the end. What's been the aftermath in terms of the feedback you've had as a filmmaker? I guess what I'm interested in is, do you think that somehow 10 years on or a bit over 10 years on from those events that now post me to that we are in a different place as a country, that we can have a more, I mean mature is a silly word, but that we can have a more reasoned conversation about those dynamics that she battled her whole prime ministership because it's not like the sexism wasn't mentioned at the time she was the prime minister. It wasn't like everyone failed to notice it, but now we are having a quite different conversation about it than we had while those events were playing out. So why do you think that is? Well, the day after it went out on Sunday, on Monday, I did a panel session with Yasmin Poole and Chanel Contos and Jess Scully. And listening to those young women, I thought, you're just not going to accept the platitudes. You're just not going to wear them. I mean, I were, they knocked my socks off, as Grace Tame does. And I think these voices are really, really, really powerful. And it gives me a whole lot of hope that yes, there's something shifting now. The platitudes just aren't going to work. There's something that's changing. Yeah. And I think that's part of it. I think there are a generation of advocates now who have no interest in being co-opted by praise or by institutions or by awards or by, you know, they are just going to, if someone hands them the microphone, they will just speak their truth. And that genuinely is a difference. But I don't know. Is it more than that? I don't know. I don't know. Look, I think, yeah, of course it's more than that. And I don't mean to simplify it and say that, you know, therefore we're just on the up and up now and all will be well. The patriarchs. Yeah, I realised. Exactly. Done. Job done. Sorted. Yeah. I think, I mean, it was your pale male and stale that, you know, that all lingers, obviously. And there's so much work to be done. And I do feel as though at times I just cannot believe that after 10 years it's so similar. And sometimes I think when, you know, when you hear Gillard say, I'm proud that I've made it easier for the next woman and the woman after that and the woman after that, I think that's true. But by how many inches? Yeah, exactly. By how many inches? It's sort of the great imponderable, isn't it? By how many inches? What do you reckon? How many inches? 2.3. You know, I just, I mean, even Jacinda Ardern, she's number three over in New Zealand. And the first thing they ask her is what happens? Are you going to have a baby? And, you know, and but I do think it's very different over there. And so I can see that it can be different here and it has to be. But I know that Gillard's issue with this film was I don't want people to listen to my story and be and women and girls to be put off. She was really concerned that that's what this documentary would do. And I know she remains concerned about that. And she did make a statement in response to the film to say, look, we have to take the historical record and it's a really important tool. But please, you know, imploring don't be put off. It's an incredibly satisfying thing to go into a political career. And I like to think that the ground there is more of this groundwork to say women are watching other women's backs. And I do just believe that the more women we get in there and that there are more than there was 10 years ago, even though the rest of the world is racing ahead of us in terms of female participation in parliament. I do believe that that's making a difference. But I mean, you know more about that than I do. Well, this is this might be a nice transition. I did say to Tosca when we were setting up this conversation for you guys that she was very welcome to ask any questions of me, because obviously Tosca's made a really impactful film about this period. I was here the whole time. I bore witness to this every day. I reported on this period intensively. I have reflected on my own practice during this period. And I've said publicly, I didn't do enough to call out this stuff. And the reasons why are actually complex. The main reason, as I've said publicly in the past, is that I just actually didn't want to believe it was happening. And leaning into that narrative that the Australia's first female prime minister would be subjected to extraordinary, just unbelievable sexism, that that would be the response for a woman of my generation, that information was just too painful to grapple with. And I think we were all frozen by it. I think Gillard herself was, I think, a number of her colleagues around her who are women of a similar generation to me, all didn't know what to do, was almost by learning into it too hard you'd validate it. And she didn't herself lean into that until the misogyny speech, really, forcefully. So anyway, that's a speech from me. Thanks very much. But what do you want to ask me about that period? Well, actually, I'd like to ask you specifically about the Australia Day event that happened during her leadership that I know that you wrote about. And that was a scene that we had in the film that we ended up dropping. But I thought it was a really interesting event. And I know that you, the way that you reported on it, it was a time when you were saying, what is this? Is this that she was so incapable of getting anything right? I shouldn't try and paraphrase you actually, you should paraphrase yourself. But I know that that was an example of a time that you were asking what this was. And so I'd be really interested to know what your reflections were on that. Yeah, well, we did, like throughout, we did ask what this was. It wasn't like you could miss it. The framing, it wasn't it wasn't subtle or, or secret. But the difficulty of reporting this time and this prime ministership was that, you know, it was a time of great tumult, in the sense of Eutosca mentioned, sort of social media was still a relatively new thing. This was the first minority parliament we had seen since the Second World War. Literally that government was engaged in a daily struggle to maintain confidence on the floor of the house. It was a government with a huge agenda, you know, some of which held over from the first rut term where ideas hadn't been implemented. So there was this incredibly compressed period of legislating that that government engaged in because Julia Gillard was such an effective manager of of an agenda and a program. So it was sort of, you know, we were there was so many elements. That's why I sort of in my response to the film, I talk about the you know, the benefit of you sweeping the landscape clean of all of the of all of the complexities of that period. It doesn't doesn't make the history untrue. It sort of actually exposes it. It gets to a truth that was obscured by the cacophony often, right? So it's sort of like, you know, that government that they made mistakes. They were in a in a daily battle for, you know, to maintain control. Tony Abbott was the well, you know, was an opposition leader who specialised in destruction of peace, of harmony, of sanity, of authority. You know, that was his whole modus operandi. And and because of the sheer the agenda was so packed. I mean, that government, my God, they they they legislated a carbon price in a minority parliament. They implemented the National Disability Insurance Scheme like what? You know, like there was a whole there was so much that they wanted to do. It's sort of like they had all that that sort of how to describe it. It's sort of like progressive governments at the federal level. They know it's an uphill battle to win federally. They're on the clock from the moment they walk in the door. They know it. They know it's not the natural order of things. Anyway, it was just it was an extraordinary period. And I don't use the word hyperbolically, it was it was an extraordinary period and trying to get clarity on what it was and what was happening was was difficult. And I think and also the other, you know, the other sort of factor to bear in mind with it was not only had social media just arrived, we were in the middle of a massive disruption of our own industry at that time, too, where we migrated from being, you know, filing for a newspaper once at the end of the day to filing most of this live, most of this played out live. And that was a very new phenomenon in Australian politics at that time, too. So again, I'm not saying any of this is apologia, but you ask me, you know, what was I what was I what was I trying to get to? I was trying to get to the truth of all of that. But yeah, it was just such a kind of it was such a crazy period. Anyway, what else do you want to know? Well, one thing that I could see when we went through everything was the evolution of Gillard. So you see in the film when she's first is just days in and they're already attacking her about her screen screen coat and oh my god, you're wearing the same earrings as you wore yesterday. She's so I didn't even think about it. And then and she's kind of surprised by the question, but okay, I'll just answer. And over the evolution of her three years, questions like that just start getting really irritating. And she's she stops giggling about it. And, you know, I mean, there's kind of a midpoint in the film, like with that Charles Woolley interview where she says, Yes, I am in love, Charles, where I got to the point where I thought I understand when Gillie Gillard is wanting to say something completely different. But instead, she answers politely. So that's kind of the midpoint of this evolution. And then we get to the stage where she's just not having it. And unfortunately, that is right at the end. Yeah. But I wondered if you guys were seeing that too. And if it was an interesting. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, that was sort of what I was trying to get to in this sort of evolution of all of us that it was sort of look, I'm not as I said, hopefully clearly, you know, Julia Gillard is not to blame for the failings of the mainstream media complex at that time. She is not to blame for that. But I think the difficulty was, yes, this sense of, as you say, she thought she arrived, that all the sexist tropes hit immediately. Lady Macbeth, you know, nice girls don't carry knives, all of that sort of stuff hit from the get go. She was, she was sort of unmoored by it. We who were conscious that this was not a good thing, all unmoored by it. She played the game in a way because she didn't respond in a way that was sort of true to her nature, if I can say it that way. It sort of added to the sense of artifice. It added to the sense of, you know, the Prime Minister playing a role, which then played back into Abbott's frame about legitimacy. Who is this person? Is she there validly? So in a way, her own response to it fed the cycle. Now, again, I said a minute ago, I hope it was clear, I'm not blaming Julia Gillard for the way she was framed, because it is not her fault. That was our fault. But it did nonetheless feed this sense of, is this quite as it seems? It just sort of fed itself, I guess. And yeah, by the time she, she sort of tumbled, well, not tumbled to it, she knew exactly what she was in. But by the time towards the end, whereas you say she'd lost patience with it. And Kevin Rudd was marshalling to come back into government. Her office kind of took a more offensive approach, tried to step around mainstream media altogether, communicate with women more directly. By the time all of that happened, it was very late in the prime ministership. So, you know, I guess if we all had that time again, I mean, I haven't spoken to her about this, but I wonder if she would play it differently if she had a time again. And I know I would. Yeah, she said pretty publicly, and I know that Tonya Plibersek said this just last week, they regret that they didn't just call it straight away and say, OK, we're not going to be talking about screencoats and that's sexist and I'm going to call you on it straight away. But of course, there was this attitude that I think is yours of OK, I think that's just going to go away. That's just kind of the initial excitement of a female prime minister and none of us can, you know, are quite mature enough to deal with that. And then we'll get into the substantive stuff. Yeah. Yeah. But actually, it just got worse. It just got worse. And the thing is, like I'll just say this quickly, obviously, the parliamentary press gallery was criticized for not fathoming the cultural impact of the misogyny speech. And that's completely fair cop because I mean, I was live blogging. I was I had the coverage for responsibility for the live coverage. And actually, if you look, if you go back, there were a spectrum of views expressed about that speech. But as a general piece of commentary, it's true. We were because political reporters are process obsessed. We are all process obsessed because it's like that's the nature of our business is be across all the moving parts of politics and policy, develop a throw forward angle, push the story forward. What's the next thing? So we're trained. It's sort of like we it's like a Pavlovian response, right? We're like cats that follow little shafts of light. Like that's that's how we're trained. And on the day, the misogyny speech was delivered, of course, it was one of those days where the Labor government was literally fighting for numbers on the floor of the house. There was a whole controversy around Peter Slipper. And she threw that misogyny speech in part, because she absolutely meant it. And she absolutely needed to say it. But also, the Prime Minister was she's such a confident parliamentary performer and an absolute punisher in the best sense of the word, right? If you want to knock your opponent out, you know, don't shoot and miss like, take take your opponent out. So it was but again, we did we we miss the cultural impact, because at that point, it was yet another day's drama in the 43rd, where the Labor government may be able to govern or not hold drama playing out with the speaker. So we're we're down the we're like for, you know, for furlongs down the process route, while there's things playing out. And, and that sort of, I don't know, as best as I can explain it, that is the gap. That's that's why it wasn't like we were all stupid. And we, we thought, oh, that was a shit speech. Although I think some people actually did think it was a shit speech. I think some people actually wrote that, which is kind of a Michelle Gratton thought it was a shit Well, it's kind of astonishing, because like, it was not a shit speech. It was it was an absolute absolute, sorry to be crude, it was an absolute ball terror of a speech. And you could see that. But again, we were all fixating on what was going on behind the scenes, which is sort of terrible in one way, it's kind of like, oh my god, but it is our job, right. So that that picture is a bit more complex than sometimes, you know, is sometimes commonly understood. I mean, I don't defend it, it was, you know, it was massive fail, my god, but, but there's a reason for it. It wasn't like we just all sort of, you know, smoke the pipe in the corridor amongst ourselves, stroked our chins and came up with nonsense or that, you know, sure, but that wasn't what happened. Anyway, in that instance, we're on the clock. Anything else? There is something else I want to ask you. I, there was a lot of stories that I heard that I couldn't tell because there was no footage, there was no audio, some really, really shocking stuff that I couldn't report on. Do you know about more stories that you can't report on either or couldn't at the time because you didn't have the evidence? In terms of the sexism or? In terms of women through parliament at that time. Certainly, shall we say, a not very healthy workplace culture for sure has been around for a long period of time. Well, I don't, I don't recall it being particularly bad during that period or, or worse than anything I've seen over the life of the building. And some of the difficulties with telling those stories, again, you know, like a theme of our conversation has been, you know, this great sense of agency that young women have developed about speaking their truths, right? Like partly, you know, some, this hasn't really been reported in the past for a variety of reasons. One, as you said, veracity, can we prove something happened, you know, to, to a publishable standard. And that in this country, sadly, is a very high standard. So you can't just walk around making allegations or reporting rumours or, I mean, you can't do that, right? So partly, it's been issues of verification, partly there's been a bit of a culture of, you know, don't, who are we to judge? And partly it's because, you know, some of the people who have had terrible experiences in this ecosystem have not had the confidence or the willingness to come forward and tell those stories in a, you know, in, in a very public way. So, but again, that's changed. And we're seeing the consequences of that in the building at the moment. And I do think some of that will be lasting as well, some of that, some of that shift. So that's important. So sort of feels like both in your sphere and in mine, that, you know, you can, you can crack it open, you can crack it open. And then you've just got to see, you know, whether the progress is any more than, what did you say, two and a half inches or whatever? We've got to keep trying for a little bit more. Exactly. And that's a good happy note to end on. So let's, let's, let's end on that note, Tosca. I really, I so appreciate the conversation. I appreciate your documentary. I think it's a really fine piece of work. I'd be interested in hearing what you guys think about it. Do track it down if you haven't seen it. If you feel trepidatious about watching it, I understand that it's, it is, it's a hard, you know, it's not easy viewing. It's not popcorn viewing. It's, it's confrontational, but it's important. It's important bit of history. So, you know, get in touch. Tosca is on the socials. I'm on the socials, obviously. Get in touch with us. Tell us what you think about it. Thank you very much. As always to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of this show. Thank you to Alison Chan, who I think is cutting it this week with Karishma Luthria. Thank you to you guys for listening, sharing, etc. We'll be back next week.