 I think the one area that we could possibly claim to be the best in the world is actually immigration. It's a very fraught area in Australia, but when you look at the fact that a third of Australians were born overseas, half have got at least one overseas born parent, when you look, when you compare that with other countries around the world, Australia is absolutely one of the shining lights when it comes to immigration. Hello it's Catherine Murphy and welcome to the show. You're on Australian Politics Live. Now a little bit of a change of pace this week. I'm very conscious on the show we do lots of heavy topics and we do lots of heavy topics because heavy topics need doing. But periodically we do need to look on the bright side. So I'm speaking to a guy this week called Andrew Weir. He's going to explain to you in a minute how we go to look on the bright side and why we're doing that and who he is and what his project is about. Listen up. So Andrew thanks very much for coming on the show. A real pleasure to be here. Thank you. So let's start by telling the listeners who you are. Yeah, so my name is Andrew Weir. I work broadly in public policy. I'm a public servant with the Victorian government, but over 20 years I've had a range of public policy jobs. And I guess one of my passions really is exploring a range of public policy from around the world to really understand what works and what we can learn from that and to take inspiration to drive reform in Australia. Well this is, I was keen to have a conversation I'll disclose upfront to the listeners with Andrew because regular listeners all know that we spend quite a lot of time on this podcast grinding over policy issues because that's what I'm into. But also things that are very hard to fix and also get sort of loaded down with toxic politics and other things. I was very taken with having a conversation with Andrew because he has a book coming out which he will doubtless inform you about in a sec, but looks at problems from the other perspective. So Andrew takes up the story. Yeah, well I think we've all been into bookshops and seeing the current affairs section and the politics section and it's full of books of the rise of inequality, the rise of racism, the decline of humanity and it's extraordinarily depressing. And I guess from the perspective of my policy background I knew that there's actually some really good news stories around the world of countries doing a great job and I really wanted to ensure those stories were told. So the book that I've been researching for the last year or so is really looking around the world and rather than coming at it from an ideological perspective it's really coming at it from a perspective of asking firstly which countries are achieving the best results, best outcomes by looking at some of that high level data and then drilling down and understanding what they're doing that's actually enabling them to achieve those results, talking to their experts, talking to everyday practitioners involved in delivering reforms in those countries to really try and distill some of the lessons. Well let's stick with Sunnyside up. So give us a couple of examples of countries around the world that are solving various wicked problems or at least giving it a crack to solve wicked problems. Let's think about a couple. Well let's look firstly to climate change, one of the biggest problems that's bedeviled Australia I think in formulating an adequate response. You can look to Denmark for example which is leading the world. Well Australia's really had since 1990 effectively zero decline in per capita carbon emissions. We were 16 tonnes in 1990, we're roughly 16 tonnes per capita now. Over the same period Denmark has halved its per capita carbon emissions at the same time as its economy has grown quite substantially. So how? Tell them, let's unpack it. How have they done it? So effectively Denmark hasn't waited for an emissions trading regime or big economic sort of frameworks to drive its reform although it's operating under the European Union's carbon emissions trading framework. It's invested heavily in renewables particularly through wind energy. And what's interesting about that is that it's actually the centre right coalition in Denmark, the political cousins of current government in Australia that actually recently committed to a target of 100% renewables for electricity by 2030. And one of the great things about Denmark that they've achieved is political consensus leading to a climate of investment certainty. When companies know what the policy framework is in the future they're far more likely to invest. And so Denmark has really seen substantial investments in wind. And I think the other thing that's really driven reform in Denmark is coming at the problem not always from the perspective of the crisis of climate change but also thinking about it through local problems that are real tangible issues for the community whether it be through local economic development on the island of Samsø which I talked to which is where they leverage investment and renewable energy to drive local economic development or even thinking about Copenhagen improving liveability, making Copenhagen a great city to live in through improved public transport and walkability and cycling has enabled Copenhagen to reduce its per capita emissions down to about two and a half tonnes per person and they're aiming to be at zero relatively soon. So a couple of things just because I don't apart from consuming lots of Scandi noir and having a fantasy that I might go on a Scandinavian holiday at some point I don't know much about Denmark's sort of economic underpinnings for example. Did Denmark have a big coal industry? In terms of you've said like the key to actually fixing this is one to sort of refract it through a materialist lens rather than talking about some quasi-religious experience of the planet's about to die or isn't going to die but how do we transform our economy for the next thing and how do we deliver practical outcomes right? And I can completely understand how that's more successful than the cul-de-sac we're in. But what about special interests though because if we're transforming an energy set up to 100% renewables by 2030 what have the losers said and how have they not been impactful in slowing progress? Yeah, well Denmark does have a coal-fired power industry and it's committed to shutting down its last remaining coal-fired power stations by 2030. And for the most part there's been a large degree of consensus in Denmark. It dates back right back to the oil crisis in the 1970s where the need for Denmark to be relatively independent from an energy supply point of view so that goes back a long way. But I think big business has been part of almost co-opted into finding some of the solutions to this challenge and for example one of the measures they've got is an energy efficiency program that sees the big electricity companies incentivised to introduce energy efficiency into the system so they effectively get paid more to supply less energy. And so they're on board with that agenda as well. Yeah, I'm just intrigued that when you say it's sort of it's accepted because culturally it's sort of for people in Denmark being energy independent is more important on a sort of sliding scale. This is kind of superficial, whoosh whoosh, look at it. But that being energy independent is more important than the transitional costs. I'm laboring this point because in Australia people, you and I are not going to get into politics but people like Matt Canavan for example, the resources minister, holds up coal jobs as some sort of divine national right and that then makes it much more difficult to sort of present these arguments to workers as well, this is a transition, you won't work as a coal worker, you'll work as something else. But I think Denmark's also seen the emergence of a whole bunch of new industry sectors built around clean energy. You might be familiar with the company Vestas, the wind turbine, wind turbine manufacturer and Denmark's really emerged as a global leader in some of this space by having that first mover advantage. There was a report that was released by the OECD not too long ago and it showed that transitioning to low carbon energy production would actually lead to an increase in GDP and that's because it involves an increase in investment, an increase in education and greater productivity flowing from that as a result. And the economy as a whole benefits and I think Australia probably has something to learn from that. And so because people see it's tangible, that the transition is occurring, that there's more benefits than costs associated with it and because it hasn't sort of been snagged in some partisan shit fight horror show. I think that counts for a lot. It counts for a lot. And trust in government in Denmark is amongst the highest in the world and I think having a relationship of trust and not highly partisan political debates enables a lot of this type of conversation to occur more smoothly than it perhaps otherwise would. And sort of government by coalition too rather than major parties being so dominant which I guess incentivises the fight show kind of dynamic of politics. To an extent, but every energy agreement that Denmark's had in recent years has been completely bipartisan with the opposition signing up to it along with the government and that's been deliberate and explicit regardless of who's in power because the Danes understand that providing certainty in terms of an energy policy framework is what enables businesses to survive and thrive in that policy context and uncertainty is the one thing that will undermine business confidence. Well, we see it here, but anyway, yes, so sorry, I've flogged that one because of course I'm obsessed with climate change as everyone knows. So give us another example. Look, I think another example is education and this book that I've researched is not all about Scandinavia and the Nordics, although it would have quite easily been about that. Pick someone who isn't a Nordic country who's doing something. But I think it's interesting that there are really two groups of countries that are really excelling. One is the Northern Europeans and Nordics and the other one is the East Asian economies and I think in particularly in the areas of education and health, East Asian economies such as Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, South Korea, they're really getting streaks ahead. I focused in the book on Singapore where for example, Singapore is achieving the best results in the world in terms of educational outcomes. The average 15 year old in Singapore is achieving a math standard that's two years ahead of the average Australian student. So how? How's this happening? It's interesting. A couple of things to learn from Singapore I think is essentially Singapore is almost entirely a government run system. The only, there's about 1% of schools in Singapore that are private schools and that's for expats but all Singaporean students go to government run schools which enables a system based approach to education to happen. I think one of the other big themes that comes through in Singapore is really investment in teachers and valuing teaching. Singaporean teachers are recruited from the top one third of graduates in their cohort. They're paid as civil servants from the moment they enter teacher education. They are paid relatively highly compared to a lot of other countries in teaching and they're really incentivized all the way through with learning and development. For example, it's quite normal if you're a teacher in Singapore to be traveling overseas every year to go and learn from other jurisdictions about teaching practice and teaching really is a prestigious profession in Singapore. As well as those systemic things and sorry if I cut you off you don't finish on the systemic front in a sec but I just want to prompt you on something. Now education I'm by no means expert in but I think I've seen suggestions by people who are much more au fait in this area that family background is a really important determinant to educational attainment. I'm not diminishing systemic factors and that's the things that we should look at to see what's successful and what isn't. His family, his culture, his family, expectations, is all of that part of the success as well. It's a big part of it and sort of East Asian culture values education highly. One study for example has shown that students of East Asian background in Australia achieve results that are equal to that achieved or even better than East Asian students in East Asia. So there is definitely that factor but that said I think even in Singapore if you look at the most disadvantaged cohorts in Singapore are achieving results equal to or better than the average Australian student. So it's the question of distributional effects and inequalities is really quite irrelevant and it's a good question but I think overall the standards in Singapore are extraordinarily high. So really that comes about through parents in Singapore rather than spending their discretionary dollars on expensive private schools with 50 metre swimming pools and knowing sheds. They're spending their discretionary dollar on tutoring for their students after hours which can create a high pressure environment and standards are high, the expectations are high, it can be a bit stressful for the Singaporean students but in one sense that's not too dissimilar to what we say with entrance exams for selective entry high schools in Australia or scholarships or that sort of thing as well. If you're buying into that educational experience it is stressful and parents I know that have got kids in private schools, all that external tutoring, tutoring for success in exams, tutoring that like it's sort of layers on layers on layers it seems confounding to me because it's not my own experience of education or my kids but it certainly exists here. But I think the lessons for Australia are really profound I think in that education and the human capital that comes with education is one of the key determinants in driving economic prosperity over the medium to long term and countries like Australia are getting absolutely slaughtered by the East Asian economies. We've already seen Singapore's GDP per capita is higher than Australia's and I think those sort of factors will see some profound changes in the relative strengths of various countries over coming years I suspect and Australia really does need to lift its game in all areas. Well this is very interesting so how I want to talk to you before we wrap up about things Australia might be doing well despite the chief doomsayer at the Guardian here constantly pointing out what we're not doing well but on that example, on education, how does Australia approach lifting its performance because we seem to have had a debate for the best part of a decade, well probably longer here about funding, about the sort of adequacy of teacher training all of these things but yet it all at least to me seems quite bogged down so how do you turn that around? I don't profess I've got all the answers on what Australian needs to do in that area but I think there's some lessons at a macro level for Australia. It's invest in teachers, it's not worry about spending money on the things that aren't directly contributing to economic outcomes or to educational outcomes I should say. It is look to those best and brightest jurisdictions from an international point of view and we need to be supporting Australian teachers with their own learning and development and their own professional development there's a lot to be learnt from around the world. Singaporean teachers are on a plane every year off to Finland or wherever they go to learn about what's working but your question about what Australia is doing well and what it could do better at I think Australia is doing quite well at some things. In education it's about middle of the pack when it comes to education but in other areas for example in health we're doing quite well I think we're about fifth in the world when it comes to life expectancy which is quite good. From the economic point of view we're about mid-pack in the OECD when it comes to overall economic outcomes, democracy and corruption we're pretty much at the top of the league as well and they're not quite as good as some of the Scandinavian countries and New Zealand etc but I think the one area that we could possibly claim to be the best in the world and I think you had Tim Watts on your podcast a little while ago is actually immigration. It's a very fraught area in Australia but when you look at the fact that a third of Australians were born overseas half have got at least one overseas born parent. Students of immigrant parents do better than students of native born parents which is one of the only countries in the world to succeed with that. We've had a huge migration program and yet the majority of Australians are still very very supportive of multiculturalism and immigration. You compare that with other countries around the world. Australia is absolutely one of the shining lights when it comes to immigration. Yeah I agree. It's sort of funny isn't it because we're a country where our societal forms in terms of federation and what occurred afterwards was built on these racist tenants like let's be obvious or let's be honest. It was systemic racism was kind of at the heart of the Australian settlement. We have very limited violence in Australia between different ethnic groups. As you say there is this sort of kind of success despite all kinds of threats to that success from silly partisan politics to just the genuine difficulty of services keeping up with rates of population growth all of those sorts of pressures. Yeah we're not going to talk about it. We don't really talk about it. We don't claim it as a success. Yeah no why not? Well I think we... What's that about? I think at one level regardless of which side of the political spectrum we're on it makes us uncomfortable to some extent. Why because it's out of step with this sort of mythical notion we've got of ourselves or what do you think it's about? Certainly we've had as you say right back to our origin stories we've had difficult challenges with race. We've had a very fraught story around our humanitarian program which causes a whole bunch of grief. It's not without issues and I should say none of the countries that I've studied although they might have some of the best results in the world all of them have got issues and none of them are perfect and I think that's okay we should be talking about that but having issues shouldn't stop us claiming our successes as well and I think when you stand back and look at it from a global point of view Australia is actually doing quite well on that front and we should be proud of that. Yes we should own it. Let's own it. We just did own it. It's good. What are we worse at do you think? It might be a bit of a pick and a poke but if you had to pick what are we worse at? Well I think there's a couple that stand out. Clearly carbon emissions is not good. We've not made any progress in 25 years and I think that's real doesn't reflect well on us and our progress as a nation. We don't do well when it comes to all of the inequality measures whether that be income inequality, gender inequality or poverty we are down the bottom. We're not we're not by no means the worst on those measures the USA and Mexico do far worse but we certainly are in the bottom half when it comes to those measures. Is that right because we sort of do I know obviously there's been increasing debate in the last five well post global financial crisis all around the world and in Australia about inequality and whether we're good good better and different on that stuff. I do I do still think tend to think of Australia as being sort of so much better than America so much better than other places. That's not a fantasy of mine is it? No we're certainly certainly much better than the USA and other countries particularly Mexico USA in particular but when you look at the OECD cohort of developed countries the sort of cohort of countries Australia should be comparing itself with where we're not doing as well as as certainly the top half and we're definitely in the bottom half and I think we if we were to ask ourselves where we need to improve I'd say it's in those metrics it's carbon emissions and it's those various inequality measures. Well can I get an amen in here anyway sorry enough report thank you. But there's enough to learn from other countries about how to do it. No no exactly it's only side up. We can look to successful turnarounds elsewhere on all of these things if we're prepared to do that. If other countries can do it there's absolutely no reason we can't to it just requires the right degree of determination and the right degree of focus from leadership in Australia and I think we know how to do it. Other countries show us the way and if they can do it I see absolutely no reason why we can't do. Okay well that's a good positive note to end on Andrew remind the listeners so this book's coming out early next year I think and what's it called? Yeah the book's called Solved how other countries have cracked the world's biggest problems and we can too. It'll be released in March next year so keep an eye out for it. Yeah keep your eyes out for it it'll be definitely worth a read thanks so much for your time. Thanks for your time. It was a pleasure. Thank you so much for listening we appreciate it as always thank you to Miles Marnione and to Hannah Isard for production you know the drill subscribe share all of that business tell your friends about it. Don't forget to our fabulous new podcast produced by Guardian Australia called The Full Story it's has been launched this weekend it's pretty easy to track down via your favourite podcast app. The empowerment's still sitting next week we've got some estimates for the back there.