 This is The Guardian. The thing with the polls is it's really hard to know where those swings are in a state election, particularly when the result comes down to a few hundred votes in half a dozen seats. Hello, lovely people of the broadcast. Welcome to the show. You're with Catherine Murphy, the host, and delightfully this week, I'm with Sarah Martin, who is chief political correspondent at The Guardian. And my dear, dear friend, hello, Sarah, welcome to the show. So good to be here. OK, so we're in the pod cave basically to talk about the South Australian election, which politics, projects around the country will know already happens this coming Saturday. I feel like I have to say, don't hang up. It's going to be interesting. Of course it's going to be interesting. Of course it is. And I suspect a lot of people will be watching for reasons we'll get into over the course of this conversation. But anyway, listeners may not know, Sarah is actually from South Australia. She's from Adelaide. Fortunately for us, she has all of that knowledge. She went back home over this past week just to sort of drop in and see what might be happening in the South Australian contest and what the federal implications of that might be, which we'll get to towards the end of this chat. But anyway, let's just not assume knowledge. Let's just assume that not everybody in the country is gripped by South Australian politics. And so let's sort of start with the basics. Right. So take us through the central characters. There's obviously the Premier, the opposition leader. Tell us a little bit about their backgrounds and for people outside South Australia. How are these two blokes, as they generally are, placed at the beginning of this contest? OK, well, let's start with Stephen Marshall. This is his third election as Liberal leader. He won the last election after that sort of peculiar three horse contest when Nick Xenophon was in the field against Jay Weatherill. Stephen Marshall's background is he previously was in business, ran a furniture manufacturing company. He's lost the 2014 election. So despite expectations and despite the Liberal Party at that election winning, I think 53 percent of the two PP vote stuck around and won in 2018. It's been a bit of a schmoozle since he's lost a few ministers. There's been conservatives who've defected to the crossbench. And of course, he's had the pandemic to sort of manage for most of his four year term. Peter Malinauskas is a 41 year old former Shoppies state secretary. He's very well known in South Australian political circles, because when he was a fresh young thing at the age of 30, he was one of the small delegation who went and tapped Mike Rand on the shoulder and said, your time's up, fella. Oh, that was sort of seen as quite audacious at the time. But certainly sort of speaks to his standing within SA Labor. He is a very impressive figure. He's a good orator. They're running very much a presidential style campaign focused on Malinauskas because they don't want to remind people that Labor was actually in power for 16 years before Marshall won the election. So they've it's kind of got shades of Kevin, oh, seven in there. But then at the same time, SA Labor, and we'll get to this, obviously, we'll talk a bit about the campaign. SA Labor is running a really effective political campaign on the issue of health. OK. And just take you back to one thing you said about Marshall. So conservatives have gone to the crossbench. Is it is it a factional thing or why? Why has Marshall had this internal instability? Well, so initially there was some issues to do with the rorting of a country member expenses allowance. And remember that the Nats in sort of don't really exist much in South Australia, although I'm sure like the twelve Nats who do exist will call me up and say, hey, we exist. But but, you know, there's it's not a coalition. It's it's the Liberal Party and you've got country liberals in this in the in the party room. So there were a few who were found to have misused that entitlement. That was the sort of first problem. There was a lot of there was some grumblings from the outset, really, because his deputy was also a moderate. So I think from the outset, there was concern among the conservatives that Marshall wasn't sort of giving them the respect they deserve. And then, of course, there was this reasonably ambitious social agenda that was pursued through private members bills, but backed by Marshall on things like abortion reform, prostitution, decriminalization, euthanasia, law reform. And that really got the goat of the conservatives and sort of further, I guess, made them feel on the outer. Then, of course, there was a a conservative who was found to and this is a court ruling. So I think the lawyers will be fine with this, that he was found to have been a drunken pest at a Christmas party. He was booted out of out of the liberals. And then there was perhaps in the most destabilizing moment, there was another conservative, Dan Kriegan, who did a deal with Labor basically to take the speaker's chair. It was sort of a midnight coup. And he then decided to sit as an independent. So Marshall sort of lost control of the parliament as well. And then you've got the situation now where you have four ex-liberal MPs running as independents. So it sort of complicates the pendulum somewhat for Marshall, because, of course, in South Australia, we've there's been a there's been precedents where former liberals have backed Labor government. So Peter Lewis, a former liberal in 2002, backed Mike Rand's government. And then, you know, like South Australia likes to keep things weird. Rand then had a Nationals MP. There was one. Carleen. Yes, Carleen Maywalt, who ended up being a Labor water minister. No one expects that if these liberal MP ex-liberal MPs end up holding the balance of power, there's no one's taking it for granted that they would necessarily back in Marshall. And I guess particularly because of the, you know, the internals and the, you know, the feeling that Marshall hasn't helped them out. Yeah, OK. And so and that the idea of independence take us to the presence of or absence of micro parties in the contest. I will remember the three cornered thing chasing Nick Xenophon around Wael or in other places in the last election campaign. So is it mainly a two horse race or or what what's the dynamic with? Well, I guess the thing is with with these ex-independence and you've also got to sort of Labor friendly independence in into key seats. So you've kind of got these six seats where it's a three a three way contest. One of them, Jeff Brock, who was also was instrumental in forming Weatheralls Minority Government. His main base of Port Piri has been redistributed. So he's now up against Dan Van Hulse Pelican, who's the deputy leader, even though that's quite a safe seat for for DVHP, as he's known, whether or not Jeff Brock can win that seat back to back to, I guess, the labor side of the tent because of that redistribution is also something that's in play, although probably unlikely. And then you've got Francis Bedford, a former independent or former Labor MP turned independent. And her her seat has also been redistributed. So she's running in another key marginal seat, New England, which sort of improves Labor's chances in that seat. Yeah. OK. Yeah. It'll be interesting to see how all of these cards fall on the night and then how these dynamics impact who is ultimately in government. Let's pivot to issues now. So what what are the major issues in the campaign? And you'll laugh at this question. Does anyone actually have a plan to fix them? Well, that's the question that perhaps people don't ask. OK, well, the main issue is definitely health as much as the liberals don't want it to be about health. That was very clear to Bowers and I as soon as we started doing Vox Pops. And we're chatting to sort of disengage undecided voters. And the issue they bring up is ramping at Adelaide hospitals. And that has been the absolute 100 percent focus of Labor's campaign, a very, very good campaign supported by the SA Ambulances Union, who I mean, I think until you're on the ground, you don't sort of realize how potent it is. But they've been chalking, which is drawing on ambulances for the past couple of years. There's been ambulances cruising around the city with anti-martial ads on them. So basically saying lives are at risk under a martial government. So the issue of health is front and center. Now, Marshall has been campaigning on the economy. He's saying we've done really well with our covid management. Don't risk changing back to labor as we embark on it on the recovery. Sounds a familiar theme. Yeah. On the ground. Health, health, health, health. You know, the ramping issue is extremely complex. And, you know, Malinaskis is pledge is not necessary to end ramping, even though the poster say Labor will fix the ramping crisis. The pledge is to return ambulance response times for priority cases to the levels they last were in 2017, 18. And that will take them a full term to achieve. However, like these are things that are happening because of long term structural issues in the health sector that are not just state government related, the federal government related. You've got a situation where, you know, primary health care has been cut. So there's no not necessarily incentives for after hours doctors, which is obviously a federal thing. You've got preventative health having been cut. So, you know, the problem is mental health patients in emergency departments. So these are really complex issues. So is it's a matter of not enough ambulances or that those dynamics that you're picking apart there, that it's complicated because of what's happening in primary health and, you know, knock on effect? Yeah. And look, I wouldn't I certainly wouldn't be an expert on the issue of ramping. I mean, and what is causing it. It's certainly got worse. You've got ambulances waiting outside hospitals because the bed block, if you've got ambulances waiting outside of hospitals because the bed block, the ambulances can't be dispatched to priority. So look, it is it is clearly a big issue. Now, I don't think that the government is not trying to fix it. I mean, clearly they're trying to fix it, but I don't think it's an easy fix. But Malinakis is promising more doctors, more ambulance officers. Look, whether or not it's going to be fixed. I look, I don't know. I have no idea. And I'm not an expert, but I think these things are very complex problems, which is really what I'm asking you, I guess, by that question. Can anyone just snap their fingers? It's one suspects that if someone could just snap their fingers and fix this, that it would have been fixed. And I mean, the other interesting dynamic to that is and Malinakis was health minister when the state government embarked on this transforming health agenda under J. Weather, which most people have described as an absolute disaster for the health system in South Australia. And it's sort of been steadily reversed. So the liberal defensive stuff is, well, you know, why would you trust labor to fix health? Because they close the Repad Hospital. They, you know, they did all this things. Transforming health was a disaster. But it sort of doesn't matter because you're talking about health. Health is labor's natural advantage. So people, you know, it resonates that labor is going to fix it. So, yeah, it's sort of surprising to me that it is so effective because of that history. But again, it just goes to those sort of central competencies of the parties. Which are enduring across election cycles. OK, so from what I see of polling, it suggests that Saturday night is not going to be fabulous for Stephen Marshall. But does it feel like that on the ground? Right. The polls, I think, are pretty sort of comprehensive, right, that it's all done by the shouting. Is that how it felt on the ground? Look, I didn't get the sense there were baseball bats. And the only time that there's been, you know, sort of that sort of landslide type result in South Australia has been, you know, when the baseball bats have been out. When I was speaking to a lot of people were saying, oh, look, you know, I think Marshall has done an OK job. He's done a good job. Or even though there are there is a lot of residual anger about the opening of the borders in November last year. Yeah. But I think mostly people sort of thought that he'd done a good job or at least the covid team had done a good job. But then there would sort of be this, but I want to fix the hospital issue. So, you know, it's it's it's sort of it sort of seemed to be it didn't feel like baseball bats. But people were there was a laning. But the fact that everyone was talking about the ramping issue just made me think, oh, well, he's in he's in strife. You know, I guess the thing with the polls is it's really hard to know where those swings are in a state election, particularly when the result comes down to a few hundred votes in half a dozen seats. Well, this is this is the problem. I mean, you know, it's the problem at the national level, too, is that we look at the wrong data in order to make an assessment of how a contest is going to work. Yeah. You know, and it's really hard to get the data you need, which is that, you know, that really granular seat level stuff, which is an enduring mystery why we can't do this properly in this country, but we really can't. But anyway, OK, so feels sort of like it might be a change, but don't bet the house on it. Now, just in terms of Saturday night, there's there's a quirk about South Australia, which people outside of South Australia may not realize. That means we might not get a result on the night. Yeah, that's right. So I think about 20 percent of people so far have either registered for a postal or have voted at pre-poll centers. South Australia doesn't allow any of that counting to happen before Saturday night. So we're not it's unlikely we're going to know on the night. And I think that's super interesting, particularly in the context of those seats where you've got independents running. Obviously, the major parties run a lot stronger postal campaign. The independents won't be running those sorts of postal campaigns. So you could see a result change quite dramatically compared to what's reported on the night. And I think Anthony Greener said he doesn't think there's any chance that we'll have a result on Sunday night. But like if it's a landslide, then, you know, you'll get a you'll get a feel. You'll get a projection perhaps, but with some other pants on it. So bear that in mind if you if you think you can have a big night in on Saturday night with your pizza and whatever else. Do something else. Possibly. I mean, possibly that's a good lesson for life anyway. Good to know. OK, so in the event, you know, we've made it pretty clear that Sarah is not calling the election result in advance, so I think we've been pretty clear about that. But let's let's go with a sentiment in the polls and speculate that Labor may win on Saturday night. Now, if that's the case, that'll be the first time an incumbent government has lost office in Australia since the onset of the pandemic. Right. So what if Labor wins? What does that mean for Scott Morrison, do you think? Or is it all people differentiating? Look, I think I think it will have some meaning. I think there's been a lot of talk about the benefit of incumbency. People I spoke to on both sides said six months ago, there is absolutely no way that Labor would be in the position they're in now. There's no way Labor would have won an election in South Australia six months ago, six weeks ago when they just after the borders had opened, they 100 percent would have won. It's fascinating. So, you know, and it's sort of that like everyone keeps talking about the sort of, you know, is this Marshall Churchill moment? Like after the Great Depression, after World War Two, Australians shifted leaders. You had a different leader to the one you had during the crisis. You picked a different leader for recovery. Sort of interesting because I still don't get the sense that like Palaszczuk, Dan Andrews, McGowan, they're still writing high despite them being at a similar point. In the cycle to Marshall. So that sort of suggests that's more to do with Marshall's leadership than necessarily the incumbency. But then also, you know, liberal versus labor. Morrison's obviously deeply unpopular. He hasn't featured much in the campaign in South Australia. And I mean, that's also interesting in terms of the Marshall has been reluctant to pick fights with the feds, which is sort of something that's so ingrained in South Australia's political psyche that it's sort of surprising that he hasn't taken that path. And it certainly doesn't seem to have done him any favors. So it's interesting to see like Perratae going down the path. Very much so. You know, the way that the labor premiers have because they've realized that, you know, you're not going to win any votes by being friends with Scott Morrison. And it's sort of it's interesting that pandemic effect. It's sort of like, you know, it'd be fascinating sort of political history one day when people look back at this period and they try and identify precisely when the pandemic became a negative for incumbents. It's sort of because we you and I do this every single day in five minute increments every single day. It's really difficult, isn't it, to think when exactly when was that when it went from being an untrammeled plus to being a drag on the brand? Although, as you say, there is a difference between South Australia and some of the other states. Yeah, it is interesting. And I think for labor, looking at what's happening in South Australia, I think there's some lessons there for the federal party, too, because one, you've got this hugely popular charismatic leader who is providing the party with the momentum they need to actually affect a changing government. I think we all agree that we're not saying that from our beneath. Yes, not that we won't, but just it's not there yet. It's not cutting through. Well, and it's sort of interesting. We'll get to we'll get to Boothby specifically that you went to in a tick. But that that dynamic is really interesting when you think about a set of campaign strategies and, you know, your supposition, you know, that Labor's cutting through in the states. Because everyone's talking about rampant, right? Whether or not they're expressing a strong view one way or another, who they're going to vote for. The campaign has been defined around a traditional labor issue. And Albanese is playing a much more defensive game federally. So it sort of always struck me as weird that federal labor hasn't been going harder on health. Like, you know, we look at 2016 and the Medi-Scare campaign. And, you know, when I was looking, watching Marshall at the leaders debate, talking about space industries and tech jobs and innovation, I was like, oh, my God, this is just Malcolm Turnbull. And 2016, like his enthusiasm. And like it's a good story to tell. Like there are in the South Australia has attracted all these great, you know, space and tech companies to Adelaide. But it's not an issue that's going to swing a single vote in a marginal seat in the outer suburbs. And it just kind of was very reminiscent of watching sort of Malcolm Turnbull flail around while people were worried about the government's non-existent plan to sell Medicare. But like, yeah, no, no, no, exactly. No, no, it's interesting. It sort of surprises me that we haven't heard more from Albanese about hospital funding and so on. Yeah. Well, they've sort of ponied up to it, but they haven't really sort of dug in and put the booster jets on, you know, and actually delivered a proposal. I don't know. Perhaps I mean, we're both speculating here, let's be honest. But perhaps it's the hemmed in issue Albanese's got that he doesn't want to take the big revenue raising measures that Shorten took in 2019. So he can't promise, you know, a gazillion friggin dollars on hospital funding, although I suspect we'll see something from them. But perhaps it's that. I don't know. But it's also this really defensive kind of instinct Anthony Albanese has to. And I guess it's sort of like, you know, overlearning the mistakes of last time. Yes, general's always fighting the last war. Small target. But I mean, like, it's interesting in South Australia, like, Malin Alsos is talking about spending money on the health system and has had a far more expansive policy agenda in terms of like a three billion dollar cost. And the liberal's like, oh, how are you going to pay for it? And he's like, yeah, I mean, I know they're releasing their costing on Thursday, but but, you know, like, it's sort of, you know, I don't know whether the costing thing has the same. Yeah. Residency as it used to. Yeah, exactly. I just think people like, well, of course, we're going to spend money on health. I don't care. It comes from just spending money. No, exactly. And that's that's a pandemic shift that'll kind of play out in the federal context. Anyway, federal context, let's stick with that thought. Let's think about Boothby, because when you were there doing your usual, you know, ridiculous amount of work in a ridiculous short period of time, Sarah, you had a bit of a poke around the marginal federal seat of Boothby, which Labor would dearly love to steal to its own column in the federal contest. What was the vibe? Well, first of all, Boothby is a very diverse state. It's got really, really wealthy areas. It's got real battler suburbs. It's got coastal areas. It's got super green areas. It's really a mixed bag. I think there was a lot of dislike for Scott Morrison, but overwhelmingly, people were still undecided about how they're going to vote, which I found really interesting. It's like even those who couldn't stand Morrison hadn't heard of Albanese yet. They were like they just had not registered. We probably should just quickly sketch the scene of Boothby in terms of a retiring Liberal member. Right. Yep. A targeted seat for Labor. Boothby is one of those seats that Labor's always it's just always been a little bit out of reach for Labor. It's got a very small margin. I think it's about one point four percent, although I didn't check before. No, no, it's small. It's small. It's always just been a little bit out of reach. The Kevin Oh seven election, they had a slightly a candidate who didn't perform particularly well in 2010. Labor's high watermark in South Australia. They still couldn't quite get there. It's been in Liberal hands for 75 years. This time, there's more confidence about Boothby than I've heard for a very long time. Interestingly, you've got the retiring incumbent, Nicole Flint. Now, I guess the the the corollary to that is that last time Nicole Flint was the target of a very, very sort of focused campaign by Get Up and the unions. Like literally people dressed up as dinosaurs at campaign booths. It was really, really potent campaign. Someone was saying to me like they had statewide radio ads just targeting Nicole Flint. Like that is almost unheard of. So you take that out of the equation. The Libs have preselected a moderate liberal who is a Rhodes scholar. She's she worked on the Ebola pandemic in Africa. She's very well qualified whether or not she can bring back some of those sort of small liberal voters who perhaps couldn't bring themselves to vote for Nicole Flint because of her conservative views. But then, of course, you've got the other interesting element there of Joe Dyer running in that scene as well. So it's going to be a really interesting. Just explain Joe Dyer quickly. So Joe Dyer is the director of the Adelaide Writers Festival. She, of course, was involved in some of the stuff around Christian Quarter. Around Christian Quarter. Was sort of featured on that Canberra bubble for Corners story. So she's she's an independent. She's an independent. And is there any is there any indication at this point what she may do preference wise? No, there's not. But I think I think most people expect her to preference labor. It's not necessarily a good thing for labor who running in the seat because she's going to pick votes off. Well, that's the point. Yeah. Whether whether she do it, whether she depresses slivers primary vote in the seat is the thing to watch with the independent in that seat. And any final thoughts, really, ahead of Saturday night? I just think the South Australian politics, you can never never say never. You can never say never. I mean, I just feel like you could any outcome is possible. Just have to wait and see. But if the polls are right, which they never are. Exactly. No, no. You sort of just have to wait and see. Exactly. Well, we all have to wait and see. And that was definitely the lesson of 2019, which we are following possibly to our own disadvantage at this point. Talk about generals fighting the last war. Maybe we maybe we're refusing to see evidence in front of our eyes. But anyway, I think caution is definitely the way to go. The point is tune in. And and, you know, it'll be very interesting, basically, see how what the result is and how the major parties in the federal arena respond to it, given that we are almost in sight of the federal election now, probably only just a few weeks away. And also pity the poor South Australia. Oh, yes. Election fatigue. South Australian voter, you know, two elections in three months. Well, that's kind of a phenomenon that we get that we should that we should just sort of have flagged to the election fatigue in South Australia. What does that mean? But anyway, we'll we'll find out. Thank you, Sarah, for your stonking insights, as always, and your hard work pulling together a really interesting piece. If you've not read it, you'll be able to search the Guardian Australia website and track that down, which was just a campaign primer, basically, and on the ground piece of reporting, which was terrific published earlier this week. So track that down. So thanks to Sarah for for her time and work. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who is the EP of this show. Thank you to you guys for listening. And we'll be back next week.