 Our communities are sick of paying the bill for the conscience of people in Metro. We get jacked at that every now and then, that every time when we go into the city and we see everyone has to have a car, there's pollution, you look at all the pollution that's going on and who's the emitters, they're all certainly in the cities, but their conscience is being paid for by us. Hello, good people of pods. Welcome to another episode of the show. You are with Catherine Murphy, the host and with me in the pod cave this week, he's laughing, is David Little Proud. Say hello, David. Hello, good to be with you. Yes. Now, David, of course, is a Queensland net and agriculture minister and I've been dying to grab him in here to talk about what is a mutual passion of ours. So- Biodiversity stewardship. Exactly. We're going to have a chat about a program or a pilot that David, in collaboration with Andrew McIntosh from the ANU, is trialing to allow farmers to participate basically in, well, I guess, get some recompense for dealing with biodiversity on farm. Anyway, I'm getting ahead of myself. Why don't you explain it? Explain what's happening. This came to me as an idea I had when I first became Ag minister in 2017. I'm from Queensland and we had vegetation management laws put in and rightfully there was large scale tree clearing that shouldn't have happened. But what happened was that took away a property right. The federal government compensated the state government at the time and the state government just put that money in their pocket and the farmer lost their right to be able to manage their land. So there was no compensation for the loss of property right. So what I want to look at was how do I bring the farmer into the solution to be part of the solution, not only to reward them for their stewardship, but also for their carbon abatement. Now, we've got blunt instruments and I think they are blunt instruments, carbon farming, because what happens is someone just comes in buys cheap land, particularly in Southwest Queensland, might be for $20 an acre and just locks up and walks away. There's no management. There's no improvement in the biodiversity of the land. In fact, it becomes quite a risk in terms of emergency management as well. So there's no management. We got pests and weeds come off it and they spread across the landscape and other farmers have to management and we're losing families out of these communities. So carbon farming is a good model if it's done properly, but what I've tried to do is build on that. So just not have the blunt instrument of carbon abatement, but actually find for the first time in the world's history a measurement of improving biodiversity. And then if you can measure it, you can quantify it. And so if you can do that, we don't just reward them for the carbon, but we're rewarding our farmers for the biodiversity. Yeah. Well, I want to ask you about measurement in a tick because that's obviously critical to whether this thing is credible or not. And we won't bamboozle listeners with all the technicalities, but I want to jump into that in a minute. But let's just take a step back because obviously it's been a very cluttered landscape in politics at the moment. People may not even be aware of the program that you've launched. So like in 25 words or less, into the listeners, what is this pilot? What will it do? So I want to reward the farmers for the stewardship of their land, for the abatement of carbon, the improvement of their biodiversity, and then be able to put a seal on their product to say that they have the best biodiversity standards in the world and demand a premium in the marketplace. The world has never seen this before. We are leading the world. We've got a window of opportunity to do it. And I'm excited as all hell to make sure we get this through. We've got the money to do it. And ANU have been exceptional. Professor McIntosh has been world leading on this. And he has guided this all the way through. I came with an idea and he has just simply put the mechanics behind it. And to be able to measure improvement in biodiversity will open a whole new market. When you think about, we've even talked about, and I remember at the press club debate before the last election, we talked about the loss in native species. We did. This is a significant step forward in not just abating carbon. In fact, if 16 and a half percent of the landscape, agricultural landscape was taken up, agriculture would be net zero emissions. That is an outstanding outcome. But it also, it doesn't take into account the improvement in biodiversity, the species that return. And what Andrew has done with ANU is they're giving you the roadmap to do it, to make it easy for the farmer to say, these are the trees you plant. This is the area you do. And all we want to do is simplify the methodology and being able to measure it, take a photo above and have someone cross it, go across it quickly to make sure that there's not huge costs, not huge impediments to take this up. But they know if they put particular species of trees there, then it tracks the wildlife back. And so this is an easy concept of rejuvenating a lot of the erosion that's been put down. Gully ways, putting in shelter belts. It's from five hectares, up to 200 hectares, this pilot. And we think we've got the science right in the measurement. No one else has done this bar, Andrew McIntosh and ANU. So we hold some intellectual property here that could go around the world. We've done it in the laboratory effectively. Now we need to run out these six regions and effectively just have these plantings, measure it and then prove to the world that this works. And someone like Andrew McIntosh is someone that will be able to measure it. And then we quantify, when we've got a product like this, you create a market because there are corporates around the world that want to do something about the environment. And it's not just about carbon abatement. So we're getting that, it's carbon abatement plus the biodiversity. So we think we can do two things with one. That's going to be groundbreaking for Australia to be able to do. And we will get the capital, not only from around the world, but hopefully here from Australia. I think this is where Australian corporates would step up. I'm giving them the avenue to use their social licence for good to support Australian farmers. And let me say, if a farmer takes out 10, 15% of their property, what they will get in income because we're adding biodiversity effectively is equivalent to them running cattle or sheep over that part of the land. So they're not losing income. In fact, they're actually stabilising their income base because they have a passive income stream regardless of what comes out of the sky. What about though, I mean, sort of the percentages you're saying is sort of 16% or whatever. If you reserve land for biodiversity tree planting and other things, is that going to be enough? Because the CSIRO, for example, had some sort of modelling around getting to net zero, which another thing we'll get into in a tick that suggested quite a lot of land in Australia would need to be locked up in essence with tree planting and other things in order to meet a target like that. Look, long winded preamble, which is basically saying, do you think we can do this at scale sufficiently? Because yeah, do you think we can do it at scale? We can. So what you understand is agriculture manages over 50% of the landscape. So they have a fair role to play in our carbon abatement, but improvement in our biodiversity as well. So this is the opportunity in agriculture is about 13% of emissions, about 76 million tonne. So even at 10%, we just on this program alone, without industry doing anything else, we would get 54 million tonne, but at 16 and a half percent, we clear the slate. And then we shouldn't stop in other measures that our industries are doing. I mean, sugar is effectively carbon neutral now, they're using biofuels from products to make sure that they're working through that. So every agricultural industry is working this, but this is just a leapfrog that actually gets agriculture at the table to participate and gets rewarded because last time they weren't rewarded. And so that's what I wanted to square up the ledger. And at 16 and a half percent of the landscape, that is achievable. That's a fair chunk of landscape for primary producers to plant to native species and to effectively lock up. So that is a fair chunk of their income that you'd be looking at. But the beauty of adding the biodiversity payment to it on top of the carbon means that it actually now becomes viable because just the carbon, you've got to buy some pretty ordinary country and just lock it up and walk away. This is incentivising farmers right across the country with different landscapes and the plantings are going to be to that landscape. So we're not just going to say a tree right across the country, it will be specific to the region. So we're working with the natural resource management groups in each of these catchments and saying, what are those trees? And that's what ANU are working through to make sure that they define what the plantings are. So it's even simpler for farmers. They just simply say, these are the quantities of plants that you provide and then you tell us what you think that's worth and we will pay you a payment that we think is equivalent in the pilot. Then what we want to do is create a market. Yes. And with a market mechanism, David. Well, it's a tax package. Anyone would think we were talking about a carbon price. Well, we are putting a price on biodiversity. Oh my God. Imagine. I just think it makes sense because the world is changing. And let me tell you, we've already seen Microsoft come in and buy some credits out of New South Wales. That's why I put the challenge out to corporate Australia. This is their opportunity to square the ledger with the Australian public, so their social licence and engages because we are creating a marketplace that won't just debate the carbon, we are actually going to improve the biodiversity in their own country. So this is where I think we're already seeing I've been in contact with a number of the banks about this. They're very excited about where we will go with this. They see the opportunity, not just in how they lend money to farmers moving on on this, but also there's a lot of investment that wants to come in. There's the corporates that want to create a mechanism to put money into the improvement of biodiversity and carbon. So this is why it's so exciting. This is a world first. When you join the two, this gives a social licence to every corporate Australian to say they are not just doing their bit in terms of carbon reduction. They're actually improving the biodiversity of our country and returning native species to areas that have been lost for so long. So this is why it's just well breaking what's happening here and what Andrew McIntosh has been able to put together. We've got some final steps just to tick the boxes to make sure it has the veracity and we can quantify it. Because measuring is critical, right? You don't have a product without it. Exactly. Like you genuinely don't have a product without it because it won't have credibility. And you won't, in terms of creating a market mechanism, creating a product to sell, which is abatement, if people don't believe the abatement's happening, then they won't effectively your carbon price. Did you hear that? Carbon price over. It won't actually, it won't work if people don't trust that the abatement is, you know, well, if people think the abatement may not be happening. That's right. So all I've done with Andrew McIntosh is create a widget and I'm able to value that widget because he has the science that can actually value that widget by the improvement in biodiversity from where it is to where it's going to go. And then that then adds, that creates the marketplace. When you have something, a widget of value, you can go to the marketplace and say, is this a value to you? Now the market is screaming. Corporate Australia is looking to place their dollars. So is the international world in terms of placing dollars? So this will be a first in terms of being able to put money into a place that has currency, that has integrity. And this is where it was so important to get someone like Andrew McIntosh to do it, to make sure that it had that currency and integrity to the system. Because otherwise I can't go to market. Otherwise what would happen is the Australian taxpayer would have to put liquidity into the market. What I don't need to, if I create a widget that has integrity and currency, it has value there and I can get people like Andrew McIntosh to say, yes it does. Then I can go to the marketplace and say, you can pay for this and you can actually reward the farmers, not just for the carbon abatement, but this biodiversity. Now it sounds awfully like in this conversation David, that you think agriculture is actually part of the solution for moving to net zero. Well it always has been. And the only caveat we've always put on that is that we should reward the farmers. Because I come from Western Queensland and we feel aggrieved. We understand the fact that large land scale clearing had to cease. But when you take a property right away in this country it should be compensated for. And we just feel aggrieved as country people that we tore, we fought the brunt of what happened there. So that's why it had been in the back of my mind for so long. How do I do this? And how do I shift the dial of making sure that we have real solutions to these challenges we have, not only here in Australia but globally. And this is one of the things where I believe ag can play, not just with the Biodiversity Stewardship Fund, but also in other measures that I think the industry themselves are moving towards. So why are some people in your show saying agriculture has to be carved out of whatever this mechanism, non-existent policy mechanism is that will take us to nets? What's happening there? There shouldn't be any more negativity in terms of the cost being borne by the farmer, by any erosion of property right. Because that's what the premise of what we are saying happened last time, is that property right was eroded, the state governments didn't hand that money back. And I've got to say that was my mob in Queensland that did that. Now they put in place a regrowth provision that is what is fought over every election in Queensland that allows it to ebbs and flows. But they put the money in their pocket and didn't hand that money to the farmer. So that I've got to say is where I want to square the ledger and making sure that whatever we do moving forward, they're part of the solution. I think agriculture wants to be part of the solution so long as they don't carry the bill again. Yeah. What do you think? I mean, you're obviously from Queensland. What do you think the sentiment is on the ground these days? Because when just rolling back a few weeks when some in your show were having an incredibly stupid argument about whether or not agriculture should be in or out or whether or not we should get to net zero or not, when that was all playing out, one of your colleagues, Darren Chester said, look, our communities are diverse. We need to represent the diversity of our communities. We can't just sort of put on the pantomime smocks and go out there, you know, just doing all that business. Where do you think your community is at with this transition? Well, I think particularly most of mine in Western Queensland has been in drought for eight years and some going into year nine. So they're at the coal phase. So they understand exactly what's happening to them and how the climate's changing. And they're paying the bill every day when they go and see the bank manager. And I used to be one of those bank managers I used to have to go and see. So the other thing I think you got to say is that our communities are somewhat urbanized as well. So you might find that hard to believe, but I've got the most dispersed electorate in the country. But, you know, even in the towns, the urban people in those towns have much of the same aspirations and fears and values of those people living in Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane. Yeah, larger centres. Exactly. So they're urbanized. And so they see it, they're probably closer to where the action is in terms of what farmers can do. So I think you should never turn your back on the opportunities that are there. And while there are some that have divergent views in the National Party, that's not a bad thing. But the majority are sitting here saying, we want to deal, we just don't want us to have to pay the bill again. But I think quite openly, we have an opportunity to really reward and to square the ledger up for those farmers that paid the bill last time. And this is the opportunity that I wanted to provide. Because what most Australians want, we've got to get back to first principles. First principles is we all agree, we just got to reduce emissions, and we want a healthy environment. So let's get back to those principles. How do we do it? Most Australians, whether they be in Warwick or Charleville, or we be in Melbourne, they say, we just want practical solutions that don't cost us a lot, but are meaningful and give us results. That's really pragmatically, I think, what if you take the noisy extremes from both sides and just get the average Aussie sitting out there trying to make a quid, keep the kids at school going for a holiday once a year, they want action, they want to be practical, they want to be sensible, and they want it to work. So what do you think? You know, I'm not asking you to speak for everybody in your party. Genuinely, I'm not. But we hear... Oh, we hear so much bullshit. I mean, seriously, let's just call it for what it is. Like we do, we hear so much bullshit. Why? Well, look, we all come from different backgrounds and beliefs. And that's not a bad thing in this place. But invariably, I've only been here four and a half years. But what I find is that normally the sensible solutions come through the end that normally, suddenly prevails, common sense prevails. Sometimes it takes a little longer than you'd like. But I think if you sat there and looked not only in our party room, in all the party rooms and looked at where we're on the page and where we all want to go, the divergent views are only at the narrow degrees. I think everyone has pragmatically said, we're on the pathway. How do we get there? Well, let's actually work through that. Let's be honest with the public about how we get there. Who pays? How do we do it? And what are the opportunities? And that's the big thing, I think. While there'll always be those that... There'll be a minority that always say they don't necessarily agree, that's fine. That's healthy. That's a democracy. We should celebrate that so long as that doesn't become the majority view, take over from policy settings that should take place. And I think there's a pathway for us to do this in a pragmatic, common sense way that doesn't hurt regional Australia like it was last time. But there are still some, and again, I'm sorry that we've got to touch down on this, but it is critical. I know what you're saying, and it's eminently sensible, David, that as long as it's... That obviously the parliament has to represent a full spectrum of views. I don't want to cancel people in the parliament who have different views to me. I think it's actually really important that these views get expressed. But we know from the history of climate and energy policy in your show particularly, that a hostile minority can hold the entire show to ransom in terms of progress. We've seen it. We've seen it on a number of occasions now. And there are some in your... In the nationals who are basically saying, look, Morrison can talk all he likes about net zero. He can get out there and be the metropolitan hero about the transition if he wants. But I tell you what, if he does anything actually substantive to drive this transition, we're going to shirt front him. So you are in a leadership position in your own political party. Sometimes you've dabbled with... You've said some things that are incomprehensible to me because I know you are a genuine enthusiast for this transition. So when are you going to grow up? All of you. No, no, I mean that. I'm sorry to be the mother in this conversation, but I mean it. When the hell are you people going to grow up? Well, I think that's why the conversation that we're having now is a mature one and one in that is representative of the evolution of our society, particularly those that we represent, those regional and remote. Because you know what? They're sick of paying the bill for the conscience of people in Metro. We get jacked at that every now and then that every time when we go into the city and we see everyone has to have a car, there's pollution. You look at all the pollution that's going on and who's the emitters. They're all sitting in the cities, but their conscience is being paid for by us. And as a nat, you start to jack up about that and particularly in regional people jack up about that after a while. But this is what I'm saying is that they're saying we got... We pay in the bill, but now if we can play in the opportunity space, well, yeah, we will listen because that's like dealing with anybody with respect. If you deal with them respect and you don't down-trod them and push them down, then invariably they are going to listen. Invariably they are going to work with you. But when you just say, no, we're going to throw this on you, you'll pay the bill because we got a problem that... That hearkens back to negative standards. That creates a culture that can only be fixed with time, changed with leadership, maturity and conversation. And that's the thing is there's a conversation that needs to happen. These are happening in a mature way and making sure that there's honesty in it because there's a lot of platitudes going on with a lot of things. And this is the thing is that while no one always agrees with me, I don't like to get into platitudes. I'd rather just say, these are the facts. This is what we can do. If I can't do it, I'll tell you to face. I'll just say, I'm sorry, we can't do that. But if I believe in something and we can deliver it, I think we can deliver it. And that's why I've got a passion for this. I think we can deliver it. I think we can be world leading. We can change not only our landscape around what we're doing with carbon abatement, but we can actually change the landscape for the better. So it's sort of like, but just getting back to that sentiment question, Ryan, like what's it like at home? Do you feel in this that it's something you have to lead? And I mean, of course it is really. It's like any big policy debate, Ryan. But we accept your point that farmers think that they've paid a price for environmentalism that feels to them to be too high. Right. But do you think that that sort of baseline is changing? Because my perception is that that baseline is starting to shift that because of the combination of they can see opportunity in terms of income streams from abatement and other things. And also, as you say, because they're on the front line of the never ending bloody drought, that sentiment genuinely is shifting in the regions. But I mean, I grew up in the regions. I grew up in Tamworth, but I'm a long way from that now. So I don't have any real organic sense of where the center of gravity is. Yeah. So it's changing. This is an important issue. It's not the highest issue. And I think any party's polling will tell you this for people in the regions is not their highest issue, but it's in their top 10. It's something they're thinking about. It's in the back of their minds. What are we doing? How are we doing it? Are we actually making some meaningful change? So that's why I think it's in their minds, but it's not it's not the issue that's that's keeping them up at night, but they want to see and that's why I say before what they want to see is some common sense solutions, some practical solutions that actually work. They don't cost too much, but actually live up to what we expect and what they want. So that's where I think the sentiment is right across regional Australia. They see there's a problem. They want us to do something about it. They just want to see that it works, but it doesn't cost too much. And if we can get a few few dollars out on the side, well, even better. And that's why, you know, that was why in 17 when I became Agman is that that was the opportunity I saw. It was the square of the ledger and make sure that we actually have this evolution and transition of our regional communities, understanding, participating and being rewarded. Tell me, is anyone ever going to build a coal plant in Australia? Well, firstly, you need a proponent and secondly, you need to stack up. So economics will have to have to prove that it can work. Is that no? Well, I'll let the market decide as we as we've been working and talking so much about now that we're into market mechanisms again, breaking, breaking. So look, that's that's the practical reality of it. I mean, I think what we can do and I've got to I've got to say that I've got four coal fired power stations. Well, you've got a really mixed energy, energy, gas, gas. I have one of the biggest solar farms in the country, one of the biggest wind farms in the country as well. So I mean, mix is what we should have. And again, if you get back to first principles about reducing emissions, then even if you can reduce emissions in the existing fleet of coal fired power stations we've got, you can reduce those emissions. Then that's a good thing. And by that, you mean retrofitting, CCS, carbon capture storage. In fact, one of the one of the power stations in my electorate is doing that and they believe that and working they're doing a lot with the US now because obviously Biden's changing his landscaper on that. So we shouldn't we shouldn't just demonise coal fired power stations if we can if we can reduce their emissions as well. That's a good thing. So just this is where you got to take the religion out of this sometimes and just get back to first principles. We want to reduce emissions because we all want clean air to breathe. So ultimately, if we can extend the life of coal fired power station, how do we keep the base load is probably the question and technology will come with that. And you know, we're seeing technology advancements in nuclear in in small cell technology in the United States in Canada. I think that's an exciting thing and advancement that we shouldn't be afraid to explore. We shouldn't stand still in looking at technology and opportunities, particularly if it gives us base load and and you know, it's safe. And I think we've made those advancements in safe in safety. And then can you can you reduce your emissions? Well, why wouldn't we look at those types of things? That's the sort of conversation I think as a country, we should be mature enough to have. And I think if we take the extremities out of these debates, I think we can start to to move towards that sensible centre of common sense and conversation about moving forward. Yeah, I agree. Removing religion from this conversations paramount at a number of levels. But again, and sorry to make you the spokesman for everybody in your party. But like, why? I mean, it's just again, it's just bullshit, isn't it? Sorry, let's just call it for what it is. Various people trotting about saying, Oh, we need coal, we need high efficiency, low emissions coal, because it's the cheapest form of power. I mean, it's just rubbish. Well, the market will determine that. But the problem you've got is baseload. And this is the problem until we crack the code on. Well, it's more dispatchable. And that's the challenge we've got with wind and solar. And, you know, they've been great investments in my electorate. I'm not, you know, I'm happy to have them all. I'm happy to have gas. I'm happy to have coal. And I'd be even happier if it if it retrofitted and reduces its emissions, they should all be in the mix. And this is the thing is, that's why we shouldn't stand still. Because the market will move forward. And it'll determine where we go in terms of dispatchable power and how we get it and how we live up to our national commitments. Those are the types of things that will they'll drive us. And eventually, that's what happens. That's how we've evolved as a country and how societies evolve globally, many respects. So that's what you're seeing. And I think it's the pace that people we need to bring on the journey with. I only got a couple of minutes sadly. This has been fun. One more fun question for you. You'll kill me with this. Look, from my vantage point, and I'll with your respect, take you out of this mix. But from where I sit, the National Party acts like a bunch of angsty teens a lot of the time. It's sort of like, you know, people unhappy about Michael McCormick. Oh, not quite right. But you won't get on with crafting an alternative if that's where the center of gravity is. So it's like I've described it in the past is like, you know, the most boring telenovelle or ever, right, you're out there kind of, you know, bitch slapping one another slamming doors having tantrums. But I mean, what is going on with you people? I mean, seriously, so, you know, how does this story end, David? This, this saga? How does it end? Well, it's been going for 101 years and I suspect it'll go on for another 101 years. Probably not with obviously the same characters. We're 21 individuals, that's effectively what the gnats are. They come from all parts of the country representing very unique communities. And the people that come into this building are very passionate about their communities. If sometimes that doesn't align with a community in another state or another region. And so therefore there can be divergent views sometimes. And that's a good thing. You know, and the reality is leadership is never easy. And, you know, I think ultimately we're conservative by nature in terms of making rash decisions around leadership. And I think, you know, Michael will be there for as long as he wants. There's no mood. But we all have a role to play because we're 21 independents. And so what we we all have our own role and our own leadership role within the party, but in our own communities. And I think that ultimately is where people don't understand the psychology of the nationals. We might go in there and have a dust up all 21 of us, but we walk out, have a beer together and we're still believing one passion and that's regional Australia. Well, yes, and diversity is no bad thing. But these days, the national party, and this hasn't always been the case, certainly in my reporting lifetime, you are, you guys are more factionalized now than I've ever seen you. So what's that about? Well, ambition, let's be honest, you got to be honest about it. You're in a place where 21 of us think that we could all be leaders. Let's be honest about it. So I mean, that's what drives not only politics, it drives society, it drives big business is ambition. And that's not a bad thing sometimes, so long as it's kept in check. And ultimately, it's for the betterment of our overall society and our communities we represent. So you got to call it for what it is. You're heading for an election. Last question, I promise, poor David. You are heading for an election, if not later this year than certainly next. There's a school of thought in at least one of your factions that you're not sufficiently, I don't even know if this is a sentence product, differentiated, but you're not sufficiently different from the liberals. This is sort of one of the ongoing critiques about Michael is that he's to me too with the liberals, you need to be you need to be different. You need to be visibly different. Is that your view? Well, we need to be transactional with them. I mean, obviously, we've had a long partnership, but our values and our beliefs don't always align with the Liberal Party. And that's not a bad thing. So long as again, our mob don't pay the bill for it, we don't have the consequences of it. And that's why, you know, at times we do need to square up with them. And that's not a bad thing. And we'll continue to do that. Michael has a different style to me to Barnaby to Matt Canavan to Bridget McKenzie. They all have different styles and leadership comes in different forms. And at the moment, you know, the main thing that we've got to worry about is this little pandemic that we're trying to get through. And you know what, I think self-indulgent politicians beating their chest is not what we want at the moment. What we want is some leadership and there's some other big issues to resolve here in Canberra pretty quickly. But I think that's what our our electors want, whether they be in regional Australia or right across the country. I lied about it being the last question because you've just put it in my mind. This genuinely is the last question. No, no. Well, you've been honest and frank about the dynamics, which I appreciate. Let's be honest and frank. You've said Michael's there because you don't have a culture of doing rash things with the leadership in the Nationals. And that is certainly true. If you did something rash, that would be well out of your historical trajectory. Do you want to lead the nets at some point? Yes, but it's not my time now. And it may never be. And if this is all the political gods have given me, I'm bloody lucky. I mean, I'm just a bloke from Western Queensland with the year 12 education that's sitting in the biggest boardroom in the country. And I've got to pinch myself, but I don't want to miss the opportunity of making a difference for my people. And if the opportunity comes up in the future and it's my time, well, it's my time. But you take what you're given and you work bloody hard. Thank you very much for joining us, David. I appreciate it. Thank you to Miles Martin Ione, who's the EP of the show. Thanks to Hannah Izard, who cuts it. Thank you all you guys for listening. We appreciate it. I'm sure I'm going to get a lot of feedback on this conversation, which is great. And David's present on social media if you want to engage with him about any of the subjects that he's raised from carbon farming to Wyeth Linnat. So angsty, you know where he is. You can track him down. I'm sure he'll appreciate it. Anyway, thanks for listening. We'll be back next week.