 This is The Guardian. This is not really an issues election at the moment. And I think if Labor allows it not to be an issues election, they may end up regretting it. At the moment, it's a personality contest between a guy that people don't really like and a guy that people don't really know. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. I think most people know we're right in the middle of the election season. And this week we had the first Guardian essential poll since Scott Morrison visited the Governor General, dissolved the parliament and pushed the country into an election. Today, Peter Lewis, the executive director of essential and myself, break down the ins and outs of the latest poll. And we do this on a fortnightly basis on a webinar. That's organised by the Progressive Think Tank, the Australia Institute. This particular conversation was recorded on Wednesday this week and we covered a range of things. Really, we looked at the gender split, male and female voters having different levels of approval and disapproval of the Prime Minister. We pondered whether or not women may in fact decide the outcome of the looming election, which is a pretty interesting thought. We discussed the phenomenon of the Prime Minister being shadowed on the campaign trail by his own record, which is a different set of circumstances to 2019 when he was last on the hustings. And we obviously spoke about Anthony Albanese's rough first week to the campaign and how he might begin to pivot out of that and consolidate and recover. Now, this conversation today is moderated by Ebony Bennett, who is the deputy director of the Australia Institute, and Ebs about to ask me the first question. Katherine, I'll come to you firstly. We are going to deep dive into the latest poll results very shortly because we're all interested in the campaign. But I did just want to come to that Solomon Islands security deal with China. It is the big news from the last 24 hours. What's happened and what should people know? Basically, this deal, this this mooted deal between China and the Solomon Islands has been signed, which is which is sort of sent. Well, I mean, shockwaves is ridiculously overstated, but it certainly is a very significant development. And and it's been observed not only within the region, but around the world. The Americans clearly very worried about it and have engaged in a full court press over recent days to try and forestall this eventuality. Also, the the Morrison government was deployed during the election campaign again to try and forestall the official signing of this agreement. So pretty amazing circumstances, elections or not. But yeah, that has been the big news over the last 24 hours. Labor's gone on the offensive this morning, really hit the airwaves hard this morning to accuse the government of presiding over, you know, a substantial regional security failure by allowing, you know, this set of circumstances to proceed on their watch. That issue basically dominated Scott Morrison's press conference on the hustings this morning. Morrison said, you know, oh, well, look, we take sovereignty in the Pacific very seriously and we've done we've done everything we can and yada, yada, yada. But I guess the danger for the government is he's this development in the middle of the campaign at a time when the government wants to bring the office being very manly men on national security issues and car key issues in general. And this development getting away from Australia cuts across that message. It goes to competency and it goes to competency in matters of national security. The other sort of barrage of questions the prime minister faced on the hustings this morning and and folks today was about nuclear powered submarines because the prime minister was on the hustings in Adelaide today where building defence material is a very, very big political issue. You face loads of questions about whether or not, you know, the promised build of these new submarines agreed under the orchestral will ever occur in Australia. And again, you know, the prime minister had to hedge his answers because it's not clear, you know, to what extent there will be an Australian build associated with these subs. So, look, the sort of summary is, you know, national security defence, their frames, the coalition likes, their frames that the message frames are made, that the coalition has sought to impose in this contest, particularly in the prelude to the contest. You know, we've been more on the economy, I think, since we've been in the campaign proper, but still they like security as a backdrop. They like security as it's like a big, you know, one of those sort of on the coals ads with the, you know, with the hands that sort of point down, you know, where the guys on national security, well, not so much, it would seem. So anyway, so that's been the sort of key development, I think, substantively and politically over the last 24 hours. And did I hear Andrew Clinell, I thought it was, ask a question about where the foreign minister was and was she at a fundraiser instead of being in the Pacific? Did he answer that one? I had to step away. Yeah, yes, I can't remember actually whether we got a direct answer to that question, but no, but this was one of the points raised, I suppose, attack lines raised by Labor this morning that as, you know, as things were escalating in the Solomons towards this conclusion, Australia deployed the junior Pacific spokesperson rather than sending Maurice Payne off into the region to sort of, you know, I guess, show as well as tell, if that makes sense. You know, you send someone senior, it shows that you're serious, you're taking this seriously. So, you know, yeah, that certainly has been one of the lines deployed against Morrison over the last 24 hours, whether or not we've done enough, whether or not we were, you know, we were onto it early enough, forceful enough in trying to persuade the Solomons this was not a good idea. And of course, then that plays back more generally into Morrison's relationship with the Pacific, which is the family, as the Prime Minister likes to, to refer to our Pacific neighbours. You know, it's all peace, love and harmony, except when it's not. And there's been significant disagreements, obviously, between Australia and the Pacific on climate change. And now we've got this extremely serious development in the Solomons. Pete, we're going to go now to the slides and the horse race, so to speak. Oh, let's not. Let's not. Yeah, let's do it. Just before we go in, I just, I wonder if in our own little way, we've helped save the government from itself with our polling, because it was only a couple of months ago we were putting out data that clearly showed the government wasn't the preferred party managing the complex relationship with China. I'm not saying there was a causal connection, but they kind of stopped running it after our poll position, Catherine. So maybe they'd be a little bit more exposed today if we hadn't been sharing our wisdom. Anyway, here's the scoreboard after the first week of the political contest, 2022. The most interesting number here is the one in the middle is actually the undecideds. So as you guys know, we changed our formulation to keep an eye on people who hadn't made up their minds yet. The top line there and for those playing at home on the Guardian podcast, if you want to go to essentialreport.com.au, you can play with all these numbers. But we've basically got a primary vote of 35 Labour, 37 Coalition, nine to the Greens on the left, 11 other independents. I won't say the right anymore, because I don't know quite how you describe teal independence, but 7% undecided, which washes out. I'm not even going to say using the old figures, because we are really conscious of not pretending that one side is above 50 and therefore winning. It's pretty tight. The big shift, if you go to the next one over the first week of the campaign, was a bit of a drop in Labour primary and only a point margin of error. But the interesting bit there was the undecideds back up. And this is all statistical noise, but it went from what I thought was a very low five back up to seven. So again, there was a lot of colour movement last week. There has been a couple of movements in Albo's approvals, as we see in a sec. I don't think anyone can sugarcoat that it wasn't a less than perfect start to the campaign and people go, oh, it's just MSM or mainstream media beating things up, but misstepping on a key economic figure on day one isn't great. And it did have an impact on people that are watching politics out of the corner of their eye, but it's the first week of a six week campaign and it ain't over. What you'll see here is that for all that and for all the boosterism that's going on around Morrison in sections of the media as well, his disapprovals are still 48, which is really high. Forty four undecideds. The other bit, if you go to the next slide, Ebony, which I've done my column in today's Guardian about is the big, big gender divide still have a look at this. 51 percent male approval. They like, you know, the Bellicose high biz dude. 38 percent female. Likewise, 51 percent female disapproval. That's a pretty substantial gender split. But also look down the bottom there. Twice as many women are still to make up their mind as men. So I think an election that does see a change of government, I think is one where women have a decisive stay in the final result. I'm not predicting what's happening down the track. I know that a lot of people are feeling really disconsulant after the first week of the campaign, but those numbers there tell me there's an election to be won here. And there's a whole bunch of issues that I also talk about in terms of my Guardian where peace where I don't think this government has much to say. And for all the for all the minimalism of the labor policy offering, there are some significant economic propositions that we'll talk about a bit later that potentially talk to this cohort, recognising, of course, that you can't reduce women down to a single demographic any more than any other demographic group. I might just stick here with approvals and go to the Anthony Alba Neezy approval disapproval. Yeah, five percent increase in disapproval over the month. So that isn't just on the week, but we're in the field last week. Approval down. So here's at net neutral now. And again, if you do have a look at the next slide at the gender split there again, big numbers of female voters who have yet to form abuse. So unlike Morrison, it's not like the gender profile of approval, disapproval are inverse. It's pretty consistent. It's pretty line ball for both. But look at that large number of undecided female voters when it comes to Alba again, which again says to me there is an election to be won here. And again, just to go back to what we started doing after 2019, keeping our eye on the undecideds and the people that say they don't know and trying to understand what's going on for them is probably the most important piece of analysis we can do. Catherine, did you have any observations there about that gender split in particular that's playing out? Well, I think it is really interesting and it does indicate, as Pete says, there is a significant cohort there. That are on the fence and are yet to decide. But the prime minister is less approved of by female voters than by male voters, which I don't think would surprise anybody given events of the last 18 months. But again, it's sort of it lines up, I suppose, with these field trips that we did in marginal seats just before the election was called properly. There is this sort of broad dissatisfaction with Morrison. And there's interest in Labour. There's certainly interest in Labour, but it's soft. It hasn't solidified yet. People haven't really locked in. Yes, yes, I'm cranky enough with Morrison now to vote for a change as represented by the other major party. Right, that's there. It's all around the country. And also, I suppose, overlaid on the top of that is the interest in this election cycle in independence and micro parties. I mean, those slides don't speak to that exactly, except in the broad metrics, obviously. I suppose our poll is very much sort of tracking alongside our improvised focus groups in marginal seats that we've been doing. You know, the sort of the main poll metrics line up with what voters are saying at this point in time. So it is interesting. And obviously, yes, look, it wasn't a great start for Anthony Albanese. It wasn't. People, as Pete says, can criticise media coverage. And I completely understand why. I really do. But that was, as Albanese himself knows, a very bad stumble out of the gate. And then, of course, was picked up by the media cycle and amplified for the best part of 72 hours, which is why we see a corresponding impact in disapproval of Albanese after the first week on the campaign trail. But all of those other metrics indicate one is close to there are a number of voters still undecided. And as Pete says, watch the women. I think that data suggests that they are going to play a significant role in determining the next government of Australia. So I just want to dive back in here because I know we do have a few questions at the end of the slides, Pete, that go towards some of those cost of living issues and whatnot. But here you've got a question which is closer to your own view about the federal government. Does that be elected? Time to give someone else a go and unsure. Yeah, this is one of those stock. There are a couple of stock standard polling questions that are used in the lead up to election that isn't who you're going to vote for, but is allegedly indicative. And I've put two of them side to side to sort of almost illustrate the two campaigns. So 4834 for close viewers, that 48 is exactly the same number as the prime minister's disapproval rating, I might add. So 48 percent time to give someone else a go, 34 percent deserve to be reelected, which is pretty close to the coalition primary vote and then 18 percent unsure. So if you were just looking at that, you go, hey, we're on for a change here, people, a couple more points and that's it. But if you go to the next slide, which is where I take a bit of caution, this is another one that we traditionally ask, which is, do you think the country is heading in the right direction or the wrong direction? It's pretty similar break, isn't it? Forty six right direction, thirty seven wrong direction. It was reminding me of the final week of twenty nineteen when all the polls, including mine, were saying Labor would win narrowly. But we asked the question, how happy are you? And we got this really high level of happiness. And it made me wonder whether people were so happy they weren't going to change things too much. And again, this is really the coalition's election campaign. If you think we're heading in the right direction, why would you change it? Labor's is it's time to give someone else a go. And the way those two intersect will ultimately be the, you know, in communications, we call it a battle box. They're the two messages that are being put out by either side. One of them wins and one of them loses. And I think the election determines on which of those frames ends up holding together for the longest. Also, you know, they are they are sort of questions testing the salience, in essence, of of the two major campaign messages. It's time for a change versus better the devil, you know. Right. That's been the opening sort of sorties of the election campaign. And we see we see this phenomenon. Right. So that because it's sort of stuck, because it hasn't really shifted decisively in one direction or the other yet. And that's because it's early days. That in part explains the resort to negatives by by both sides, because generally what we get a barrage of negative sort of after the midpoint of an election campaign broadly. I mean, that's a that's sort of a bit of a truism, but that's what experience would tell me that in the opening couple of weeks of an election campaign, both sides try to put their nice smiley positive face forward. And then as the campaign accelerates to decision day, that's when the negatives tend to weigh in, you know, the sort of it's like an offensive, a ground offensive where the air force. General offensive. Yeah. The air support comes in, which is the advertising usually negative. That's like all come a bit quicker in this campaign, I think, because of because of that. That's my theory anyway. So the other thing is, I think those two slides also explain the extent to which a lot of people would see labor with a bit of a policy straitjacket on in there trying to say we're going to have a change, but accepting that the majority of people don't think the country is heading in the wrong direction now. The other thing is, look back to February, it was much more we're much more positive. It's a shift of what, you know, nine, 10 percent since where it was line ball, right, wrong direction back in February. So it is actually also explaining why labor would be making the safe change argument rather than a radical change argument. We all thought we were heading in the wrong direction. It might be a very different campaign. Next slide here, would each of the following be higher under a labor or coalition government? So labor and coalition kind of head to head on a range of economic impacts. Yeah. Look, I was interested here in taking it one step from better economic manager. Who or who do you trust to handle these issues to actually look at specifically to people think different economic inputs would be higher under labor or coalition. And what's really interesting to me is I on areas like debt, interest rates and unemployment, the coalition are seen as being lower labor higher, but not by a lot. But then on wages thirty seven twenty three and cost of living thirty one thirty three. That's really line ball, isn't it? And then a high level of saying it makes no difference. So, again, it makes you wonder whether there is that salience in terms of the coalition totally owning the economy the way that I think they would like to. And the, you know, most political textbooks would say they do. I'm party most trusted to manage the care economy. Why did you put this one in? Well, if you look at what Labor's policy prescription is around health, aged care, early learning, child care and also the disability policy released yesterday, where labor is putting different policies forward, it tends to be in this area, which going back to my earlier statement or observation around where women are. And I don't want to characterize these as a pink economy because I think it diminishes them. But these are sectors of the economy that often just get brushed aside as being service lines, which are actually really hefty parts of the economy. The health is a large part of the economy. Age care is a failed sector of the economy where old people are not getting the care they deserve because of a failed business model. Early learning child care is a potential engine room of building the next generation of kids being more ready for school, delivering more productivity for for Australia's future. And the NDIS, the work we've done with Per Capita and disclosure, I'm running the campaign in that field. So I've got a bit of skin in the game there for every dollar spent on the NDIS, a $2.25 dividends. So I think looking at those elements as part of the economy is actually a bit of a political statement in itself. I notice the great Peter Hartcher wrote a very compelling article in the Fairfax last weekend looking at the mummy versus the daddy models of government. I challenge that. I think part of Labor's challenge is to say this is an economic reform agenda. We are looking at areas of care that will deliver long term economic benefit. You can say a lot of things about us, but don't say we don't have an economic agenda because it's there. And if they roll that out properly and you look at those undecided female voters, that seems to me to be, you know, political gold. But Catherine, coming back to you, that's really the challenge, isn't it? Like Labor's trying to set out that on these issues that, you know, they're hoping people care about and where the wages are low, that they are much more trusted by the community to deliver in those aspects. Whereas the coalition's kind of much more macro, macro level will keep interest rates lower and harking back to those kinds of campaigns. Do you have a sense of which has got more traction at the moment? I think both are a bit nascent, but before I drill into that point, I've suddenly thought for people listening to the show, as opposed to watching it, my very helpful crossed arm gesture with fingers pointing in opposite directions will be completely lost on the audio audience. So a minute ago, where we were talking about those two points of messaging going in opposite directions, I made a gesture, a crossed arm gesture with my arms with fingers pointing in opposite directions just to translate my own stupidity for the audio audience. Now listen. Well, it's more tasteful than that, Catherine. Sorry, guys. Sorry, guys. Seriously. Anyway, in terms of which is which has taken off, which is your question, you know, I care and your government cares versus versus will keep your home interest rates low. And I mean, and don't forget, voters at the moment are being bombarded by Clive Palmer ads saying that he'll fix interest rates at 3% or something absolutely absurd. So that's sort of being bombarded through Palmer's television advertising messaging at the moment. So anyway, that's that's just an interesting point to run that in the back of your mind, because all of Palmer's ad spend is still massive. And even if the issues that he's highlighting aren't really sort of at the center of the of the major party campaign, they are still in the background. Yeah, I think it's been an interesting shift in the last couple of weeks. Palmer shifting to those interest rates and those messages because it starts feeling like he's leaning behind the liberal narrative. And just just to round out, and I'm sorry to do this. I don't think Labor runs we care like I think we care is an invitation to say we're going to spend more money. I think it's more that we are going to take responsibility for sections of the economy. The government has let fall apart or just drift like aged care and disability. And I think Labor's line that Morrison doesn't take responsibility fits into that. Yeah, no, no, no, it's it's entirely true, Pete, and good to draw out that distinction that it is a responsibility point. But I also do think that it is an empathy point. And I think if anybody watched Anthony Albanese's press conference this morning and the way he constructed arguments around failures in aged care, it was certainly a responsibility point that the prime minister doesn't take responsibility for anything other than the photo ops. But it was also an empathy point. It's like the contrast he was trying to draw is I'm real, I care and that bloke, he's not real and he doesn't care. So it's both in my view. I don't think it's all responsibility. I think empathy is there too. And then that plays in some sort of the broader point, which is Ebb's point, like which economy are we debating right in this election campaign? Well, the reality is both. But I don't think that any any particular message, be it responsibility, stroke, empathy or interest rates has really accelerated yet in terms of the main campaign message message largely because because there is on on certainly on the government side. You know, the principal difference between 2019 and now with with Morrison as a campaigner is not that Morrison is has become less able at campaigning. Morrison is extremely able in the campaign space. That's his strength. What's happening in this campaign that did not happen in 2019 is that he is being shadowed by his own record everywhere he goes. He wants to just get back into his preferred message machine mode where he's like a combine harvester rolling around the country, spouting out messages. And he'll roll over anybody who's not, you know, like it's basically like one of those public affairs systems that is rolling down the road attached to a heavy vehicle. That's what that's what he wants to do. That's his strength. But he is being shadowed constantly either by internal disunity and and roving street battles in different sort of areas of his own political party or by his record in government, which leads us back to the Solomons, which is where we started the conversation today. Do you get the sense that the do you get any sense the magicians given up his tricks, though, like is the gallery just accepting his messages the way they were three years ago or are they starting to go, hey, this is just an announcement. What's the fun? What's the basis for the announcement or are they just taking it all in still? It's like you ask me the gallery as if there's a hive mind as if there's a daily meeting out there in the corridor that we all attend and take notes. That doesn't happen. Contrary to popular myth, that doesn't happen in terms of what a report is doing on the campaign trail. Well, I think week one, if I'm being honest, was predominantly amplification of the key messages of the coalition campaign. I think week two towards the end of week one and week two, we started to settle into that dynamic that I flagged a minute ago that that he can't outrun the record. That's the point. It's sort of like Morrison, I think, got 72 hours of clear air to establish the terms of the election. And then and since then there's been this crowding in of of his record or or culture fights or institutional fights within the Liberal Party. And so he's now getting basically he's getting that quite aggressively, I think, each day through the traveling media pack. So anyway, there's a long way to go. I do think these these two issues substantively sort of call it the consumer economy with interest rates and wages and other things and caring economy. The two aren't the two aren't contending with one another. They're all part of the same bloody economy. It's all the same thing. I think broadly that's where the campaign will kind of orbit around. But it's just that it's been very messy because there's constant sort of disruptions. In the first week, it was Albanese and the GAF cycle and in and now it's Morrison and the record. I'm going to go to the first question from Robert Delves, who says, given that minor parties are polling nearly 30 percent, is it fair that nearly all media is Albo and Skomo? Although I know a lot of media is trying to avoid those nicknames, Albanese and Scott Morrison, shouldn't they be getting one third each with minor parties getting a third of overall media coverage? Catherine, I'll come to you on this one. Well, look, I think it's it's a balance. And I actually think there's been quite a lot of coverage for independents and micro parties in this election cycle, because if you do any work at the moment out in in marginal seats, what you'll detect is that there is a there is a pervasive pox on both your houses environment out there at the present time. And there is an appetite for alternatives for independents and micros. So I think actually there's probably been truthfully, I think there's probably been more reporting about some of these other sort of contenders, I guess, than there than there usually is. With that said, though, we we basically maintain close watch on the major party campaigns for the very simple and blindingly obvious reason that it is the major parties in Australia that form governments. Now, at the end of this election campaign, it may be close enough that that this is a minority government of one stripe or another. That is absolutely certainly possible, in which case we know I know from experience having obviously covered the forty third part element, then you're reporting sort of telescope is like, you know, has to has to pan out much more widely to basically make sure that you're across all of the relevant political actors, because that's the way you follow deliberations and decisions. Right. That's in terms of how the parliament actually works. So while, you know, I get that there's all kinds of legit reasonable criticism about media coverage and, you know, I'm also a media consumer as well as a practitioner and I sit there kind of whack them ahead on the desk as much as anybody else. But I actually think the coverage this time is probably proportionate based on where opinion polls tell us the contest is tracking. And we do need to maintain the most focus on the major parties for that simple reason. They are at this point in Australian political history. I mean, I don't know what will happen in five years or 10 years or 20 years, but right now governments are formed either by the Labor Party or by the Liberal and National parties. And that is why there is the lion's share of focuses on the major party campaigns. But yeah, I guess Catherine too, with so many independents and it's not just teal independents in safe liberal seats. There's a whole range of micro parties and independents running against the Nationals in regional seats as well. So it's kind of a very big phenomena, but hard to pick which one is going to get across the line. Well, that's the thing. And it'll be interesting because, you know, where we wash up at the end of this campaign in terms of when we look back professionally and think, OK, was our focus in broadly the right place? Right. Were we looking at the right seats? Were we looking at the right campaigns and candidates and actors? You know, it's very hard to do these things perfectly in real time. It is incredibly hard to do it perfectly. And as it says, it's not only the teals, which are obviously getting a lot of focus. It's there are independents in seats all around the country that will make the sort of end result in some of these seats very interesting. And there is the phenomenon, obviously, of of Palmer and and One Nation and the residual anti mandate anti-vax sentiment that is still in in minority in this country, but around right in places all around the country. So, look, I think to the extent that we are able to media wise with the with the resources that we have, I think we have actually attempted to have our eyes in as many places as possible. But, you know, will we make the right calls about who, you know, which was the right independent to watch? I mean, look, it's not a science. It's an art, you know, in terms of, you know, we could we could do it perfectly in hindsight. We absolutely could. But when you're doing it in real time, you know, your eyes are not necessarily exactly in the right place. But anyway, we'll find out. It's pretty interesting, this this this campaign and how that resolves in terms of how the kind of independent miners micro party vote resolves as a thing in itself and how the preferences from that disaffection are distributed. You know, a bit like the women, how we were saying earlier, a bit like women will decide the outcome of the election. I think, you know, preference distributions from a lot of these non major party actors will also determine, you know, who the next government is. Yeah, just sticking with that, I've got a couple of people in here asking about Adam Vance performance at the National Press Club last week and kind of what the panel thought of that. For those who didn't watch it, I was actually there and he covered obviously some of the green key concerns and tried to set out kind of how they would negotiate if they end up in a position of balance of power and helping to, I guess, pick who gets into government at the next election. So some of the key asks were to put dental and medical care, mental health care into Medicare was one of the key things. Another one was a moratorium on kind of new gas and coal projects, as well as really highlighting, I guess, all the subsidies that are going into that as part of their focus on on climate change, obviously, as the Greens party. Catherine, did you have any other reflections on their contribution, particularly given that they, you know, they're likely going to be in balance of power, at least in the Senate, if not in the lower house as well. Well, the Greens remain a really important political force in Australia. You know, it'll be really interesting to see that I know the Greens are doing some slightly different style of campaigning in some of the lower house seats that they're contesting, like in Brisbane and other places. There's just some interesting tweaks to their campaigning style on the ground in some of those progressive seat tussles. Then in terms of where the Greens end up in the Senate is pretty important to, you know, the complexion of the next Senate of Australia. And one of the, you know, I've certainly touched on this point, but, you know, we'll probably do more on it as we get closer. There has been this really interesting, I don't know how I'd describe it exactly, but sort of like risk planning. I don't describe it as that in terms of Senate actors. There's the Greens, obviously, that have a large block in the Senate. There's also been concern, you know, we've seen Nick Xenophon return to the Senate race, for example. You know, I think I've said on the show before in Northwest Tasmania, my God, Jackie Lambie is a phenomenon. It's very hard to describe how big she is to a national audience unless you've been down there and had a look. I think there is this interesting kind of risk management planning going on between, call it the non One Nation Senate forces, right? There is certainly a desire on the part of the Greens and others that One Nation don't end up with the balance of power, if at all possible, at the end of this election result. I think that in large part explains the return of Nick Xenophon to attempt to get himself a Senate spot. But, you know, I think in Jackie Lambie's mind, she thinks if I can get back, if my candidate, preferred candidate can get back, Tammy Tyrrell in Tasmania, if Xenophon's back, then there's a block of votes that are not necessarily sort of populist right wing votes in the centre or a block of representation, I should say. So anyway, that's a bit of a stroll away from the Greens, but the point being, the Greens remain an important force in Australian elections. They will be after the election. As Ebb says, they'll certainly be in a position of significant influence in the Senate, depends slightly on who the other actors are in the Senate and the final numbers. But they, you know, they are very important. And also we could be dealing with a minority government situation in the House of Representatives. And I can't see Adam Bant losing his seat. So I imagine, you know, we're in for a pretty interesting time on the other side. Sticking with climate change for a bit, the next question is from Ronald Smith. He talks about Angus Taylor using undisclosed data sources to claim the cost of energy will increase under labor. And pointing out that we still don't know where he got the documents that turned out to be fake about clover more. Catherine, do you know how the Guardian is reporting this at the very least? Yes, look, there was there was a what we call in our line of work. There was a drop, meaning, you know, figures are supplied to the News Corp. Tabloids earlier in the week basically putting question marks over Labor's climate change policy and the impact on power prices and other things. Look, obviously, every everybody's policy is open to scrutiny. There have been some minor criticisms that I'm aware of or questions raised around the Reputex modeling that sits behind the Labor policy at this point in time. I mean, there are some entirely credible experts have said, I'm not entirely sure that's right, exactly right. But it's kind of ballpark. But anyway, so there has been a debate. Then all of a sudden, you know, sort of work that was construed as modeling, you know, entirely unclear by whom. Highly unlikely to be actual modeling turned up in the News of the News Corp. Tabloids at the start of the week, which was, you know, shock horror. Labor will do terrible things to your power prices and, you know, kidnap all your unicorns or, you know, whatever the line was. Anyway, it's sort of, yeah, look, my wonderful colleague Adam Morten, who's our climate and environment editor, wrote a very good piece in The Guardian today. If you've not seen it, basically pointing out that this is how lives get seeded during election campaigns. Look, compared to 2019, I'm not sure yet whether or not the seeding of that particular lie will be as problematic as, you know, the lie of the last campaign, the principal lie, which was the war on the weekend, which was the campaign launched against Labor's entirely sensible vehicle emissions standard policy. Look, I don't know whether it'll have the same salience as it did in 2019. But for those of us who've been around this rodeo too bloody long, you know, you see these things, you see this, this is this is the beginning of a misinformation campaign. It needs to be called out early and often. And if you want to read something erudite to the point on the subject, have a look at what Adam's published today. It's very much worth your time. And Pete, the next one might be for you. Alan Colligato has asked what's the important issue that will make the undecided cohort get off the fence? Do we have any sense of what those undecided voters care about? I think that for labor, health is still the the opportunity. They have not really announced a lot at the moment. And health is something that can be as broad or narrow as you want to make it. But that's obviously a sweet spot for for labor in most elections. I think it's got to be more than just they're going to rip apart Medicare. So we've got to see what rolls out and whether you can build momentum around that. But I go back to the this is not really an issue is election at the moment. And I think if labor allows it not to be an issue is election, they may end up regretting it. At the moment, it's a personality contest between a guy that people don't really like and a guy that people don't really know. Now, if Albo can fill himself in in a way that is makes him appear a safe pair of hands and that's the whole election, then you'll say amazing three year strategy well executed. But there is also a world that says there is a world that says this is an overcorrection from 2019 when labor threw everything at it. And this time they're kind of not putting anything out there. So I don't think the cupboard's totally been emptied out on what they're going to roll out. I don't know. But I think that the onus is really on them to not just be enough to say, we're not the other guy. But here are some things that we are going to be doing that will make your life better. And again, back to the earlier stats, it's not like the libs have a mortgage on better wages, cost of living or the other economic indicators for that matter. Labor's well ahead when you start talking about the caring economy. There are rich veins to be tapped. It's there to be one. And I feel there's a lot of people probably on this call, a lot of people on our side of politics that feel, oh, my God, here we go again. The polls are wrong. And, you know, Morrison's going to pull off another miracle. Now, maybe he will. But nothing is preordained. What happens over the next four or five weeks as those disengaged voters who look at politics out of the corner of their eye know they've got to turn up to vote. And some of them won't be making their call until they're stepping in that booth. How you create that wave of change is still the real challenge to change government. And it is still there to be one. This one might also be for you. Have you looked at the Senate race in the ACT and is that soldier in danger against the two strong independents that being, I think, David Pocock and Kim Rubinstein Greens also in that mix as well. Have you looked at the ACT recently, Pete? Look, we do a poll of 1000 the ACT for all its dynamism as a place doesn't rate a statistically valid mention in our poll. So I can't pretend we do. But I do know that particularly David Pocock is one of the two independents is being seen as a real threat to what did Penny Wong call it? Chief Woodchucker? So there is a real there is a real battle going on in the ACT Senate. I just don't pretend to have any polling numbers on it. I've got one question here I did want to touch on from Mel Smith and Catherine. I'll send this one to you. What impact does the issue of trans women have on out of suburban voters? I think it's a big issue for the people who are not following that. It's come up both in Tasmania with a Liberal candidate in Tasmania and for their current candidate in Warringa as well, highlighting the issue of trans women in women's sports and trying to make that into a big issue. Catherine, I can't really see that that's the hugest issue facing women's sports. But yeah, why is the Prime Minister picking up on this? Who is he targeting? It's an interesting question. And I think if we sort of work through this sequentially, the whole sort of cultural war around trans is huge in in the United Kingdom and in America. It hasn't really hit Australian shores yet. We're sort of, as usual, a lagging indicator in the culture wars. So so I just want to say that as a bit of backdrop. It's a very it's the new culture war in democracies not unlike Australia in terms of how it's being inserted in this contest. Well, look, I see there is some commentary around about whether or not the Prime Minister has just already written off the teal seats, whether he's just assuming losses in all of those seats and using weaponising trans as an effort to try and appeal to out of suburban voters or voters in late red seats. Or blue, like blue seats, like seats that are currently labor that might switch to the coalition column. You know, I see this sort of being speculated around the places if this is some grand strategy or master narrative. I'm not really sure that's right. I think obviously the Prime Minister Scott Morrison, like John Howard, before him has a long term political project to try and convert as many traditional political voters as we call our labor voters to the coalition's cause as he as he possibly can. I think that's quite important to this prime minister as it was to John Howard. So I think, you know, any anything that he can weaponise that speaks to that demographic, he will. That is his past form. Although, interestingly, in government, he tends to back off the culture wars. It's quite interesting, actually. And I think this is a long term project for the prime minister in broad terms. But look, I don't think that this is some sort of master strategy that they've cooked up, that they're just willy nilly shrugging their shoulders and saying, oh, yes, actually, we can afford to drop five seats in this election campaign, including your treasurer. Exactly. Which because we're going to pick up these kind of blue, leaning red seats. Look, I mean, maybe that's a dynamic that happens. Possibly it happens. But I think it's probably more accurate to describe this or characterise this as a found strategy. Right. And by that, I mean something that you you develop along the way. You discover, oh, God, we've got a problem here. I'm not sure we can reverse the problem. And by a problem here, I mean a problem that the Liberal Party has amongst a centre right progressive voters in metropolitan Australia, which is basically the dynamic sitting on underneath these teal contests. The government obviously has that problem. It hasn't despite, you know, Morrison dragging the gnats across the line on net zero and other things hasn't been able to diffuse that bomb that the Liberal Party has in the cities. These teal independence, I don't know if any of them are win, but they're certainly they're running very professional campaigns and the government is certainly very worried about those sites. So it is possible that Morrison, you know, who will have excellent polling, the Libs, the Libs always have very good polling and very good data. It's possible he's looking at the sort of map of the country at the moment and thinking, oh, God, maybe maybe we can't get those seats back. We have to we have to lean in. We have to look for gains elsewhere and we have to do that by whatever means necessary. I think that is possibly happening. But sort of, you know, and and some days demonstrably happening, I shouldn't say possibly because it is demonstrably happening. But again, if we sort of realize we're kind of coming up against time and this is such a good question. But anyway, and I'm trying to do it justice in my answer. It's sort of there's there's a little tiny test of that, whether or not Morrison's completely written off his teal seats or not. And that's this private members bill by the Liberal Senator Claire Chandler. Now, Morrison dangled that out in the first week of the campaign as being something that he might have something to say about during the election campaign. All of his moderates went to put it politely, I've shit and the prime minister then said, oh, no, I will have nothing more to say about that in the campaign. You see what I mean? I don't think we're looking at a master narrative here. I think we certainly are looking at a strategy, whether or not it works. I guess we'll find out people. I just want to say, I just think we've got to be careful of not always describing Morrison with this amazing power. It seems to be much more stuff up than a conspiracy. He's got front benches now trying to blame the New South Wales office, which Morrison has overtaken for a candidate they don't want to be seen with. This would be the old all this focus on labor being in disarray. This is a government in absolute freefall and disarray. And we will only know which one of those narratives is right when we wake up the day after election. And again, just to reemphasize women's sport, probably not at greatest risk from trans women. And of course, we've seen the trans community more or less thrown under the bus for two separate policy wars now around women's sport at the moment. And previously in the religious discrimination bill. So sending all my love out to the trans community, trans rights, human rights and hang in there, everyone. Hopefully it doesn't get uglier than it already has. Well, that was our webinar show poll position that's put together for us by the Australia Institute. There's video available of this conversation as well. So if you prefer to see the slides as we go along, we'll give you a link to that on the podcast web page as well, just so you can go and have a look. We'll also put up a link so folks can register if you want to watch the webinar live next time we do it in a fortnight. Thank you, as always, to Miles Martagnone, who is the EP of this show. And thank you to Helen Smith, who edited for us today. And we'll be back, of course, in your feeds this Saturday with another of our Ask Us Anything episodes featuring my wonderful Canberra team. We'll see you then.