 Since I've sat here in the chamber, I've seen all sorts of allegations made in the floor of parliament, which are pretty terrible. So having strong institutions contingent upon having mechanisms to examine an allegation so that it could be put to bed, I mean, that would free us. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You are with Catherine Murphy and with me this week is the delightful Helen Haynes, member for Indi. Helen, welcome. Thanks so much, Catherine. And hello to all your potties. So Helen is in the Pod Cave this week because there's a lot of interesting stuff afoot happening in the background about integrity commissions and transparency in politics and accountability in politics, all of which is sort of bubbled to the surface over the course of the week. But if you guys have been following the news closely, you'll know that the dominant story really has been climate change and the Morrison government's positioning ahead of the Glasgow Climate Conference. So I thought in order to just elevate the integrity issues a little, because it's a very noisy environment that I would bring Helen in and we'd have a conversation about it, because if you're a regular listener, you will know Helen is a crusader on this subject because we've discussed it at length before. But anyway, we're catching up because a few things are afoot. So let's start. Now we are recording on Thursday. You met Scott Morrison yesterday. Is that correct? I think it was only yesterday. Time is liquid in this place. No, exactly. No, it was yesterday. Yes, that's why I pause slightly because I just wasn't entirely sure. Anyway, okay, you met the Prime Minister. Let's tell people what that was about. Well, I meet with the Prime Minister regularly, actually, so every couple of months and I sit down with him and talk to him about the kind of things that are concerning me on a local level in my electorate more broadly for the nation and what my agenda is in terms of trying to fix those things. So one of the key subjects that I've spoken to the Prime Minister about since I came to parliament was around the Federal Integrity Commission. And of course, our starting point was that the government had promised to introduce one. And we're now at the point, of course, where that hasn't happened and where I've introduced my own legislation a year ago tomorrow. And so I frequently talked to the Prime Minister about that. So yesterday when I met with him, Senator Patrick was about to introduce my bill into the Senate under his name. So I was flagging that with the PM to say, you know, I'm serious about this PM and I'm working with as many people who I can. And there are investors who are very interested in pushing through with the bill of mine that's, of course, being identified by the Centre for Public Integrity as best practice. And so Senator Patrick's about to do that today. So just letting you know if you don't already. Of course, he did know already. And then also indicating to him that I would be reintroducing my bill into the House of Representatives next week on Monday and asking him, could he have a word to the leader of the House and instruct the leader of the House to bring on the bill? Bring on the bill. And what happened next? Well, you know, I think the Prime Minister appreciates that I'm candid with him about my plans. And again, I do that because I'm not interested in just performing a stunt. I am actually genuinely interested in asking the government to cooperate with me on this. So the Prime Minister said, no, that's not going to happen. Helen, absolutely not. OK, I accepted that. So my next question was, or not question my statement. The next was I'll be asking Mr. Dutton if he'll at least open up a speaker's list on that suspension of standing orders. So folks in the House of Representatives who might like to say something have the opportunity to do so. So that's what I'll be doing. I'm hoping Mr. Dutton will say yes to that. I think he will on Monday and I shall proceed. That will fail. But that won't deter me from continuing to pursue this. And a little bit of context around that is we've seen over the last couple of weeks in particular some liberals, some members of the government coming forward with critiques of the government's own proposal on an integrity commission. You know, doesn't quite go far enough. You know, also the Attorney General has flagged some possible adjustments to the government's bill. Would you think that in terms of that speaker's list and bringing on the bill in the House next week that any liberals might use that reintroduction as an opportunity to make some points? Or I know that's not what it's about. I know. I know that. You just want to get an integrity motion. I have to understand that. But everybody needs to play three dimensional chess in this building. Yeah, they do. Yes. And you will have thought about this. So what do you think about that? Well, I mean, firstly, on Monday, there was a motion debate in the Federation Chamber, which was a motion brought by Andrew Wilkie, one of my crossbench colleagues. And it was around the need for a federal integrity commission. And some of the Liberal Party backbenchers who've been speaking in the media about their desires for a much more robust version of the government bill than what's currently before us spoke to that motion. So Dave Sharma and Katie Allen and Brigitte Archer all spoke. And there was indications in that debate that they had some areas that they think the government kick framework because it's still not legislation, of course, not even draft legislation. Yes. So that needed improvement. And that was around some of the very fundamental features, Catherine, like public hearings, like the capacity to be retrospective. There's several elements, as you and I well know. Yes. I followed up then, actually, with Dave Sharma and with Katie Allen to talk more about what they had to say in the chamber and with Brigitte Archer too. And I've had regular conversations with others in the House, people you would be well aware of, people like Lou O'Brien, people like Celia Hammond. So there's many parliamentarians who have views on this. And again, that opportunity to open a short speakers list on a suspension of standing orders, while it won't materially change what happens to the bill on Monday, then just gets these views out into the public domain more formally in the chamber. I think it's really important. It's a small step, but each step is a step. No, exactly. And nothing happens here without a series of small steps. It's part of building the case and I'm certain that Backbenchers expressing views about a model for an integrity commission would focus minds in the cabinet and certainly in the Prime Ministerial suite. Well, it's interesting. I put that to Mr Morrison and he, of course, said as the Prime Minister would, that there's opportunities for those members of parliament to air those views in the party room. And indeed, I imagine they will. And that's great, but it's also very important to pin your colours to the mast in the public domain through the media, which has already happened. But more importantly than that, sometimes it's pretty easy to say something to the media. It's another thing indeed to show what you really mean in the House of Representatives. And of course, the ultimate is always how serious are you when it comes to a vote? Exactly. And do you think that, I mean, obviously I know you would prefer your own model. And as you say, your model has had significant respected third party endorsement. Do you think though that the government can adjust its own proposal to, well, not create a perfect model that would be given the amount of time it's taken to get to here, you sadly would have to question the bona fides of, given how long it's taken. But is there a model that the government could bring forward that is less than yours, but greater than theirs, that you and some of your other crossbench colleagues who are very attuned to this issue could support? Is there any universe where that happens? I'd like to think there was a universe where that happened. But it would take serious endeavour from the government and they would have to move on from what we heard at Question Time today that they've undertaken considerable consultation and continuing to do so. And terms like refinement, refinement indicates there's a small amount of fine tuning. We're way, way outside of fine tuning. The most fundamental principle of one set of rules for all is, I think, one that we absolutely must have. We simply can't accept a model that has a different set of rules for the Australian Federal Police and other agencies to that which MPs and senior bureaucrats are held to. That would be completely unacceptable. I think to many members of parliament actually, not only myself, so there's some fundamental principles that need to be there. But look, to be absolutely frank, I think that the government's kick model is completely unamendable. I truly do. I do think that Senator Cash and Senator Stoker, and I hope they're doing this, have got out a new sheet of paper and are really listening to the consultation because that framework, as it stands, is just woefully inadequate. Now, it doesn't have to be a Helen Haynes bill, of course it doesn't. And you've heard me say it before and I've said it in the floor of parliament, I would be happy. It's a gift. It's a gift to the nation. Take it and work with that. But I think like any decent piece of legislation, it needs to be built on some fundamental principles. And obviously very hard to bridge that gap. What about too? Because obviously we'll get to climate a little bit later in the conversation. They're related though, Catherine, aren't they? I think they absolutely are. I was having a conversation with some constituents earlier about refugee policy and they said, Helen, we know that the work you're doing on integrity is related to refugee policy. We know it's related to climate. We know that's why you do it. It's related to all policy. Yeah, it really is, isn't it? No, of course. Yeah, it's a bedrock. Of course, absolutely it is. The point of me going there was not to make that good point. It was to surface. There's been a lot of organization or a pickup in organization among the independence movements, voices and Climate 200 and other groups who were marshalling in liberal territory basically to try and win seats. And if you can't win a seat, at least make a point, Ryan. Obviously a lot of the focus on that has been climate and deficiencies in the government's climate policy. The integrity issue is certainly there and it's to the fore. But can you see a situation where some liberals would be vulnerable from independence on the integrity issue as much as on the climate issue? Do you see what I mean? Yes. Look, it is extraordinary that there are voices movements mustering around the nation. Well, maybe it's not. No, it's not really. But it's very interesting. It's so fascinating. And it's fascinating to me as the member for Indi where this began and those voices movements are all independent of Indi, that's for sure. So I watch with fascination about the way they're going about this. And in fact, interestingly, I got on the phone to one of the electorates recently and said, look, it's no business of mine, but you might want to just not be so negative about the sitting member and talk positively about what good looks like. Just flip it around because that's certainly what worked for us in Indi was not to focus on what you don't like, but to focus on what you would like to see. And I think, again, it's no surprise to me that climate and integrity are the two top issues that these voices movements are finding when they do their kitchen table conversations. It resonates right around the nation and it resonates because they affect every single person. Something like climate, particularly in regional seats, we're right there on the line of climate change. We are the ones out there. We're the CFA. We're the RFS. We're the farmers in a drought where the local towns, where the floods, well, that happens in the cities too. But we are there where we're seeing up close and personal the impacts of a changing climate. And even some of the most conservative cockies around tell me, of course, they monitor the rainfall. They've been checking their crops for the last how many decades they know things are different. Of course they do. And they're adjusting for it. The good farmers are. And that's why you're seeing the Meat and Livestock Association with a carbon neutral target of 2030. It's why they're planting legumes that are fixing nitrate to the soil and reducing methane in the guts of cattle. It's why the National Farmers Federation have had this target of zero net carbon by 2050 for so long because they know. So I think, and constituents understand that too, and they're perplexed why their sitting representative is not expressing the view of the electorate. And it's gone from, I think it's like there's been a penny drop moment where they hear their local MPs speaking on one level about strong support for climate action and then they see them vote differently in the house. And I think that's something we're hearing a lot. Have a look at how your MP actually votes. Yeah. It's an interesting element of the campaign because you do see that sort of getting traction in some of the social media conversations around politics. I mean, obviously it's sort of at one level, their response to that would be, well, hang on, Helen, this isn't America. We don't have perfect liberty to vote. How have we won on any issue? Right? That would be the rebuttal point. But then your point is that you should not be able to get away with mouthing nice platitudes. You know, it sounds a bit rude, but sorry, let's just be direct. You shouldn't be able to get away with mouthing platitudes while not following through with action, right? Yeah. Look, I think so. And I absolutely take your point. This isn't the United States, but likewise, if your representative is shackled to a party and a view, then it's no surprise to me that many electorates are saying, well, maybe we don't want someone who's shackled to a party. Maybe we do want someone who can vote according to their conscience or the conscience of the people more importantly, because it's never really about, I mean, it's only occasionally that it's about your particular view. It's about how you interpret the view of your electorate. That's of course what we're here to do. Yeah, I think the other thing that's important to say about the Voices movement is that it's actually encouraging people to listen up, you know, to engage, to not just leave it till election day before you think, oh, heck, who will I vote for? I will status quo. Or, you know, I'm going to make a protest vote to actually say, no, maybe you really would benefit by interrogating the candidates a little more and to do it in a respectful way, to do it in a way that's not throwing mud at individuals that's actually asking them about how they would behave in the parliament. So I think that part of it is really terrific. I think it genuinely is really good that that's happening. And this week also we've seen a sort of procedural snafu in the parliament, which is sort of integrity adjacent. It relates to pecuniary interests and the registration of pecuniary interests. If you guys missed it this week, there was an effort by Labor to refer Christian Porter's use of a blind trust that was used to pay his or some of his legal fees in a discontinued defamation matter. There was a view or an attempt to refer that to the privileges committee, which is the sort of what's kind of like the self-regulation committee of the parliament, isn't it? Yeah, it is. That's a good description. It's sort of these guys sort of look at those issues, look at standards, look at accountability, look at how the whole show is travelling. Now, the government used its numbers to block Labor's referral, even though the Speaker had given it precedence. Peter Dutton then produced some correspondence that he had sent to the chair of the privileges committee with a request to clarify the use of various crowdfunding arrangements, et cetera. What did you think of all that, Helen? Well, look, firstly, I would say that this began really on Monday when the leader of opposition business, Tony Burke, stood up and spoke to the House and to the Speaker and asked the Speaker to consider this. Yes. And so I was listening carefully then. I have an enormous respect for our Speaker and I have so much to learn as a first term parliamentarian. So I was listening carefully. He said, I will take this away and consider it carefully and return to the parliament, which is what he did last night. And he said there was a primer-facy case for this to proceed as a referral. So I wasn't in the chamber at that moment, but I was listening up in my room and I thought, okay, well, that's good, that's done, that's going to happen. And next thing, it was a reversal. Yes. So that was quite extraordinary, actually, for the government to take an opposing view to its own Speaker. Yes. Yeah. And then the rest all broke out, of course. So I'm actually deeply concerned by that. I really am. And I think there's plenty of other people on both sides of the House who were deeply concerned by that. Do you think, because the government says in its defence, Peter Dutton's instructions to the reference, I think is probably the better parlance to the privileges committee, was designed to take on board that particular blind trust as well as other examples, right? This is what the government is saying today. So we didn't actually block Christian Porter, no, no, no, no, no, even though we stood up in the parliament and blocked the referral. No, no, we absolutely want all of that clarified. Do you buy that? No, I'm with the Speaker. Yes, actually. It's sort of strange though, isn't it? Why you'd... It's sort of unfathomable to me that you would sort of... If you wanted the broad ranging look and clarification and you wanted to give the committee scope to make findings, why we would... I mean, they can do that. They could do that. Of course they could. No, of course. And that's something that perhaps not all listeners will understand, that the privileges committee is its own beast. It could do whatever, in fact, it feels it should do. And maybe it should do that too. I think there's, of course, the issue of political donations more broadly is really problematic in this place. And I think it does warrant much more scrutiny. Of course it does. In fact, I think we should have significant changes to the way political donations occur in the federal parliament. Far more aligned with what happens in the states and what happens in other nations. Absolutely. But I think when we have a situation such as what we had last night where the Speaker of the House has given consideration to this, that this wasn't a snap decision from Tony Smith. No, no, no. And then the privileges committee could go away and do their work. So I think it's, again, tragic for transparency and tragic for our democracy that this became so highly politicised. It didn't need to be so. Yeah. And it's sort of strange to do it too, because from every bit of feedback you've ever given me and through me watching the care and focus you've brought to these issues since your arrival here suggests to me strongly that these are cut through issues in communities. The communities basically see these issues as proxies for whether or not the institutions function properly and correctly so. So it's sort of, I don't know, I just find it a perpetual head scratcher that you would sort of line up on the wrong side of those debates as we've seen happen. What's your theory about this? Look, you know, I'm as perplexed as you are because no parliamentarian enjoys speculation that they may be corrupt, good grief. I mean, that's an extraordinarily serious allegation. And I seriously don't think that there's too many people who would fall into that category. And I think that having strong institutions contingent upon having mechanisms to examine an allegation so that it could be put to bed. I mean, that would free us. You know, since I've sat here in the chamber, I've seen all sorts of allegations made in the floor of parliament, which are pretty terrible. So, you know, I just think we would eliminate a lot of that if there was the right mechanism by which to examine it. And again, I'm always perplexed when I hear MPs alarmed at the thought that an independent commissioner would be the person charged with having a look at something and determining, A, if it's even worth investigating. And let's face it, there'd be a lot of things that get said in the chamber that would never be worth investigating. It's why, again, any integrity commission needs to have strong safeguards such as the legal definition of a vexatious or frivolous referral. But something like the privileges committee, you know, it's a time honored way of looking at a question such as what's been asked of the member for Pierce. And I think it's I think it was tragic last night what happened. I was deeply, deeply concerned by it. And you said you were in your room at that point. So obviously, these debates come on and off. Everybody follows the play. If you're not in the chamber, you're watching the chamber. But how are the pairing arrangements working? Oh, gosh, I'm glad you asked me that. So, Catherine, as your listeners probably know, like not all parliamentarians are present in in Parliament House at the moment for very good reasons. There's borders closed. There's issues with people coming and then being subjected to long periods of quarantine, all sorts of things going on. So in order to manage that, again, there's a time honored tradition in this place whereby the major parties if if someone's unable to attend the parliament, they get what's called a pair so that the voting is reflected in a in a fair way to indicate what in fact is the numbers in the House. And that's been going on with with the coalition and the Labor Party in the House of Representatives. But no such pairing is there for the crossbench, unlike the Senate, where there is actually an opportunity for crossbenchers who don't have an obvious reciprocal on the other side to to actually cast their vote. So members of the crossbench in the House of Representatives, all of us, Mr. Catter, Mr. Kelly, Rebecca Sharkey, Zali Stegel, Adam Bant, Andrew Wilkie, myself wrote to Mr. Dutton and said, hey, we're not happy that some of us are missing. And there's votes taking place in the House, which would have a different outcome. In fact, if all the crossbenchers were here, we believe and there needs to be a process for us, you're leaving us out right now. The numbers in the House, if everyone attended, would be 75 on the coalition, 75 crossbench in the in the opposition with the Speaker having the casting vote. Now, last night was the classic example. I know, because I've asked them if we had have had the crossbench represented, we would have had a different outcome. We would have had the member for Pierce referred to the Privileges Committee on the recommendation of the Speaker. So this makes a material difference. And I think, you know, if you're not looking, you don't see, but the will of the people is truly not being represented at the moment while the crossbench doesn't have the capacity to be paired in some way or to indeed to cast their vote. And what explanation is the government giving you for? Because you're right, I'm aware of the pairing arrangements that exist in the Senate. Why is there a different set of rules in the House? Yeah, a really great question. And one, when I received the letter from from Mr. Dutton to say, and he used the term impractical, I said to him, I had a conversation with him as we left the House yesterday after that inauspicious scene. Peter, there are many things that have been impractical about this pandemic. I don't think impractical is a genuine reason not to not to make this work. Yes, but that's that's the long and the short of it. That's the long and the short of it. But Catherine, you could read other things into that potentially, you know, when you know that it will make a difference to something very important, for example, a vote on an integrity commission or a vote on whether the member for Pierce should be referred to the Privileges Committee as as determined by the Speaker, then this makes a big difference. And the issue is we don't know how long this is going to go on. This could go on all the way through to the next election. So I think this is a real problem. And and impractical. What it's just like, sorry, can't do that. It's not practical end of story or at the moment, end of story. I'm not that happy to make at the end of the story. Gosh, you know, I mean, one of the things that's been said is that there's only four minutes in a division that wouldn't be sufficient time for the cross venture to decide how they were going to vote and indicate in a safe and secure way that this could happen. Well, again, you know, like we've we've locked people down in the houses. Could we not maybe just for the period of the pandemic, even extend it from four minutes to five? You know, like, I mean, there are course there are things we could do if there was a will to do it. So, yeah, the cross venture. I really worried about this. We had a brief conversation about climate change and the relationship with the Integrity Commission. I just wanted to end our catch up just with one more question about climate change. Obviously, you're watching the the government prepositioning out of Glasgow and some of the debates that are sort of being framed by regional representatives who are opposed to the transition. You obviously represent a regional community. I don't think you've got coal mines, have you? No, no, we don't. And that's actually important to say that I wasn't being flippant. No, no, no. I think it's a really fair point. Yes, I haven't. No, yes. And and obviously, people represent the dynamics of their regions. So I'm just sort of foregrounding that so that the question isn't clear. Yeah. So Northeast Victoria, that's right. Alpine region, Flat Plains Murray River. Yes, yes. No coal mines. No coal mines. But I think you have quite a different view, obviously, about about the transition and the opportunities associated with it. Obviously, there are transition costs, but you have a different perspective, which is not really being referenced very much in the debate at the moment. No, it's not, Catherine. And I put a question in the house this week. I think it was Monday, actually, to the Deputy Prime Minister as a rural and regional Australian, as as a representative of a rural and regional seat. Would part of his negotiations include really important things like ensuring that regional communities who are at risk of bushfire would have a community battery in every town, that there would be opportunities for rural and regional Australians to truly profit from the inevitable boom in renewable energy and that that all the profits from these large scale renewables wouldn't all go offshore, that a significant proportion of that money would flow into regional towns, that there would be opportunities for young people in regional towns to train in areas such as wind turbine technicians as solar panel producers that the fitters and turners of yesterday would become the fitters of turners in creating transformers for renewable energy projects. I mean, in my town of Wodonga, there's a very large manufacturer who builds transformers and they're producing all the transformers for the biggest battery in the southern hemisphere down in Geelong. So I know that there is enormous opportunity because the people of my electorate tell me so. What they're concerned about is that this will all happen around them, to them, not with them. And that what kind of say are they getting? And again, I would say to anyone listening, if you look at where the renewable energy zones are in Australia, they are actually in some coal mining areas. So there's a real opportunity there. I want to see those people getting those skills opportunities. I want to see the TAFE colleges in those zones being funded to run these new courses for the young people there. And I want to see any large corporation that's setting up in those towns to genuinely engage with the rural communities where they're setting these up and make sure that profits and benefits come to those towns. And I think that that's the kind of thing I hope to God, the National Party are talking about right now with the Prime Minister. This is sort of an interesting question, isn't it? And we're recording ahead of the clarification of a list of extras that the National Party will seek in order to give in principle backing to a net zero commitment. But Catherine, you know what I have to say is again, it just beggars belief that after eight years in government that the National Party had no plan of their own, that they are awaiting the government to present them with a plan. According to the plan, Helen. Yeah, you know, it's just so disappointing. And the regional Australians I represent can just scratch their head to say what you know, what the heck here? There's so many things that we could be doing now. Again, if the if the junior coalition partners are going into a negotiation with a shopping list of of stuff. Well, again, I think that's that's not a plan either. That's a checklist. And we could and should and must do a whole lot better than that. You sort of made the point in passing, I think, but it's it's an intriguing one. What would be the reaction of your community, for example, if by early next week and we're aware of the sort of terms of the agreement, the terms of the agreement was basically a whole lot of drilling in behind traditional industries and not much focus on transition because we've seen it. We've seen the language in particularly in the parliament this week that renewable energy doesn't generate many jobs. It's sort of you know, it's just a personal lawnmower and a sheep. It's like, I'm just interested, right? And obviously, you know, Australia is highly regionalised and there are very different views about this issue in different parts of the country. Like how will it go down at home if the wish list is, I don't know, you know, like a continuation of the rail line to Gladstone for more coal port exports or, you know, you know what I mean? How will that go down? I think it'll go either of two ways. It'll either be, well, I'm not surprised at all. That's exactly what I thought they do. And it's blooming hopeless. Or they'll be complete and utter outrage by that. And right now in my electorate at the last election, the National Party secured nine point five percent of the primary vote. And I think the southern southern states, I think we only have to look across the mountains from me at Gippsland and Darrin Chester seat. Darrin's been very clear that that his electorate of a similar mine to mine around this, that this is actually an opportunity of a lifetime for regional Australia. If you get the levers right, and you know, I'm I want to say that this, you know, this is the new gold rush, this is the new wool boom. Get the levers right. Make sure that the that our provincial towns and cities really benefit from this, that our coal mining communities are the ones at the front of the queue when it comes to new skills and training. We really could do this. And I'm not naive. I know there is pain involved here. Of course there is. But that pain can be assuished with good policy. Imagine that good policy. What a perfect note to end on. Sorry, we're not laughing. It really is the objective good policy remains. So Helen, thank you so much for your time. I really do appreciate it in the middle of a busy sitting week with a lot of moving parts. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of the show. Thank you to Karishma Luthriyat, who will no doubt cut it for us. I am actually out of the country next week. So I will attempt to get a pod episode for next week. But if I skip a week, you'll know I'm on the trail of the Prime Minister as he heads to Glasgow. So anyway, thanks, Kathy. Have a bonny time. Thank you.