 This is The Guardian. All right, polls, guys, do we believe them? The bit I believe is that 30 percent of people still undecided or voting for others or independents. Hello, lovely potters. You're on Australian Politics. I'm Catherine Murphy and with me this week. Josh Butler. Paul Karp. Sarah Martin and Amy Romakis. And we are answering your campaign questions. We are going to answer your campaign questions and they are, as usual, excellent. Sarah, you're up first. So this week we're going to start with a question from Lisa Johnson. Thank you, Lisa. She says it seems the LNP has abandoned its moderate faction. MPs in favour of dog whistling to the right wing conservatives in this election. If they lose with this strategy, aren't they risking sending themselves to Coventry with the voting public? That's the first opener. And and there's another one from Jack Seman. I hope I've pronounced that correctly, Jack. Sorry if I haven't. Both leaders have said they won't negotiate with independents in the event of a hung parliament. Is this just talk or is there a real chance we could be forced back to the polls? Yeah. Sorry. If neither party can form a majority government agreement. Thank you both for those questions. Sarah, kicking off with Lisa. Lisa, I think that you're probably asking this question with particular reference to the Catherine Dives sort of ongoing saga that we've been hearing about over the past couple of weeks. And that's sort of particularly the sort of moderate right wing split has been particularly apparent with people in New South Wales coming out and criticizing her and calling for her to be disendorsed while Morrison has stood by her. I think you are right that they the prime minister is definitely backing the conservative view on this and is ignoring the pleas from those moderates. And we obviously reported that there's been private pleas from sitting in pays like Trent Zimmerman, who are worried that this is a distraction for them to hold on to their what are known as teal seats, where they're being challenged by Climate 200 backed independents. So I think you're right that that's the decision that Morrison has made and obviously very deliberately. So there's a lot of debate as to whether or not he's quite happy to have this little culture war on the side. And he certainly hasn't he sort of very softly criticized some of Catherine Dives' commentary, but more or less he has backed her in 100 percent and said that he pretty much shares her view. He's made no attempt to shut down the issue and is very happy to have it sort of simmering along, I think, because I think their assessment is that it possibly helps them in certain seats. And they always quite enjoy having a little culture war on the side. So if they abandon those teal seats completely, there's a lot of debate as to whether or not that is a strategic shift for the conservative side of politics and whether there's sort of a long term goal in mind, where we're seeing in this election, they believe they can flip some traditional labour held seats. Hunter, for example, some of those working class seats that have always been in labour hands. So there's certainly some within the coalition who think that is the way for the government to go. And that would mean abandoning those inner city seats. And it's obviously the view that some have is it's how Boris Johnson has been successful in the UK with the sort of so-called red wall strategy. There's mixed views about whether or not there's equivalence in Australia and enough seats for them to be able to do that. But it's certainly the case that there are some who think that's the way to go. So does it risk sending them to Coventry? I guess we'll see whether this strategy with Morrison's focus on the outer suburbs and regional areas is one that pays dividends for them electorally or whether or not if they do lose those teal seats and it's a result of losing those teal seats that they can't form government, perhaps they'll reassess. Perhaps. Oh yeah, and then sorry, Jack's question about, oh look, don't, no, no, they don't. There's no way they're not going to negotiate with the independents. It means they have a chance to form government. That one's easy. Yeah, I think that's the safest bet in politics at the moment, regardless of what they're saying. Before we move on, any other thoughts either on replicating Boris Johnson's red wall? Red wall? Is it red wall? It was lay with red wall, the traditional sort of working class seats. No, I'm sure that is the terminology. I just doubt on myself for a minute. So either red wall or whether or not there is some prospect of having another election this year. As if they would have another election this year. Like, is this ludicrous? I mean, like there is, I guess that sort of thought that like maybe the those independents wouldn't sign like a formal coalition, coalition with a small c rather than the big c of, you know, labor and the greens and some sort of cobbled together, a little faction that, you know, give them supply and confidence. But they negotiate day by day on the day by day stuff of parliament. But as if Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese are going to go through this whole thing and like Anthony Albanese has been working for 26 years getting to be the prime minister and he's one seat away and he goes on. No, I won't. I won't make a deal with Zali Stegl or with whoever. Like, yeah, it is. And Adam Bant has actually ruled that out going back to the polls. Oh, yes. Good point. Because, you know, the labor is saying absolutely no deals with with the greens. And even in that circumstance, Bant isn't prepared to make that threat. So I think that's a pretty good indication. Safe bet. OK, all right. Paul, you're up. So from Caitlin Scamp, Hi Murph and everybody. What is the significance of Albo winning the Sky News debate in Queensland, a conservative news channel in a conservative state? So that's Caitlin's question, obviously referencing the first leaders debate of the campaign, which happened on Wednesday night. Yes. On on Sky TV. So we'll deal with that in a tick. Caitlin and from Dave Madden, labor could be running a much more negative campaign, for example, drawing more attention to recent blue on blue attacks. Why do you think they're not doing this? And will it come later? Well, I might start there because they have started their negative ads just today on Thursday. It's almost like you willed it, Dave. I mean, almost like, you know, just by asking us the question, the ads turned up anyway. Sorry, go on. They have started the ads. They're on free to air and digital. And basically it's a roll call of Morrison mistakes, including, you know, bushfires, being on holiday in Hawaii, vaccines, rapid antigen tests, greatest hits. But more than just reminding people of the mistakes, the ad argues that, yes, you know, bad things will happen and mistakes will happen. But the difference is, you know, a leader will take responsibility and Morrison has shown that he won't. And then it runs, you know, him saying that's not my job a number of times and looking very smug in the last in the last one. So there are negative ads that are running now. And this reflects feedback that you, Merv, and we've all heard about. It's persuading more voters in those marginal seats to be arguing Morrison is not up to the job rather than to, you know, Labor doesn't have a big policy platform. Albenizi is still relatively unknown. So they're not they're not trying to win the election that way. In terms of whether they should be looking at blue on blue violence and splits within the Liberal Party, I think they just let those issues run and people can see that division. And there's no point in Labor pouring petrol on that because there are so many better things to attack, like all the things that are in the ad. In terms of the first question about the debate, yes, you might think, you know, Sky News and Queensland, that that would be, you know, rough terrain for Anthony Albenizi. But if you if you look at what the voters actually chose to ask him, it was quite a home ground advantage. Quite friendly. Yeah, it was interesting that questioning for Labor. I mean, people were mainly asking about the quality of government services. So there was an aged care question. There was the National Disability Insurance Scheme cuts question. There were several questions about integrity, either generally or specifically about the need for an anti-corruption body. And those are things that are generally Labor strengths, that Labor had more policy to announce in those areas. There's only one question on foreign policy and it was about the stuff up of the fact that China has has a deal with Solomon Islands. And there was there was none really on the macro economy. It was Scott Morrison that was constantly driving the conversation back to the macro economy by arguing that if you if you don't have a strong economy, then you can't pay for the government services. So the questioning was actually quite benign for Anthony Albenizi and that that was an advantage to him. And I do think that's why why he won. And not many people are going to be watching a debate that's on cable TV news anyway. And more important than the very narrow 40 to 35 win with 25 undecided. More important is how it plays into the news cycle. Yes. And how it plays into the news cycle is after a horrible first week, you know, Anthony Albenizi gaff free encounter or, you know, one minor slip up on both turnbacks that he corrected during the debate. Yeah. Whereas Scott Morrison had a day or two of bad coverage about it because of the you know, the blessed comment about being blessed that, you know, his children had, you know, don't have a disability or yes, that he didn't have to navigate the NDIS. Yes. I think to just to be clear, because I think the viewership figures came in, I think there was about one hundred and seventy five thousand people who watched the the first debate of the campaign. So obviously, you know, I mean, it's a lot of people, but in TV terms, it's nobody. Also, just in case you didn't watch it and you've never seen the format, the debate format on Sky News, because there's always at least one sky debate during the election campaign. Just bear in mind, this isn't a situation where the sort of sky after dark roster turns up and just slugs everybody with questions. It's an audience of undecided voters. And and, you know, they ask the questions. So and as Paul said, you know, the the questions on Wednesday night were in policy terms favorable to Albanese and labor because they're in areas of strength. Anyway, I just thought we better say that because so few people actually watched it. So, Josh, you're up. You've got three questions. First from Peter Bragg has the candidate for Warringa committed to any interviews or press conferences where her views can be explained and subject to scrutiny. If not, why not? Then your next question is from Helen Lewis. Again, Helen, I hope I've pronounced your name correctly. Helen asks, why are the greens mostly not being referenced by MSM? And by that, I do hate that acronym, but that means mainstream media. Thank you, Josh. During the lead up to the election, including by the ABC, the third largest party could get balance of power on the Senate. They represent about 12 percent of Australian voters. Why so disregarded? And your third question is from Jonathan Foy. Hello, Jonathan. How will the AEC be taking into account covid when it comes to how this election is run? Good question, Jonathan. Anyway, Josh, far away. There are three good ones and I'll go through them. I guess we'll start with Warringa. Not that I've seen. I don't think she's made any sort of big personal comments. She's got a lot of written comments and they've all been sorry for my past tweets and I apologize. And I've deleted them and she keeps putting out that statement every other day when someone else finds some other tweets from her. There was a candidates forum that she was meant to go to two nights ago. I think that she pulled out a debate or a forum of some kind. There's been all these other sitting morning heralds been following her around and there was some, I think, fundraising dinner or something that she was supposed to that she went to and as a private home and they like smuggled her in in the back of a car and there's all these great photos in a sitting morning herald. There must have been like the roof of the house across the road or something like that. And there's these paparazzi shots sort of through the balcony or something like that of this woman bundled in the back of a car and they drove her into the garage. The cold kids and stuff. Yeah, or it was like Taylor Swift in the box or something. Like it was smothered out of the apartment. I don't know. I think she's just, you know, they don't want her anywhere near a camera. I don't think like she's posting a fair bit on Facebook and she's posting photos of her out and about checking hands with people on the campaign. Yeah. Hostings, but I don't think we'll see her near a camera or anything anytime soon. I'm just going to back through the rest of those questions. Yeah, so yeah, no, I might have. It brings a good one. The 12 percent thing I think is interesting because their numbers as much as you can put store in News poll and that sort of thing, their numbers have bounced around a bit. I think they were at 12 in the last one and they were as low as like nine or eight, I think, a couple of weeks ago. So, you know, that's that's a fair change in a couple of weeks. The question about why they're not getting more coverage. I think it's because everyone is so focused on this election where it could be a change of government in the House of Representatives and the Greens have one MP in the House of Representatives at this point. Like I said, obviously, they are talking very much about their potential to hold the balance of power in the Senate. They want to pick up a few more seats. They're talking about I think they've got nine seats at the moment and they're talking about, you know, wanting to get as many as 12 in the Senate, which will be what they say is their biggest representative number they've ever had. I think the biggest third party. I think it will be the biggest third party outside of Labor and Liberal ever, which would be would be a big deal. But I mean, that's not that's not, I think, certain. It's not definite. No, no, no. I was just trying to think about the Democrats that I'm too feeble brained to think that far back. I think we saw a couple of weeks ago on different podcasts, but like the Greens always talk a big game in each election. They've only ever had this one MP in the lower house. But even today, I just I just saw that again, to our polling and this was a Greens poll. The Greens say that they might have a really, really, really good cracking Griffith, which is a labor held seat in Brisbane. They reckon they've done all these tens of thousands of doorknocks and they've done this polling based on that. And I haven't seen the polling. So let's take the grain of salt. But they said they've done this similar type of polling previously with like some of their state candidates. And it's been almost, you know, bang on what the final result turned out to be. So that seats, I think, on a two or three percent margin for Terry Butler up there. So I mean, you know, I think Amy is shaking her head here. But we'll hear from maybe on the spot. I mean, it's really interesting. I think that would be one that they are really confident of picking up. But obviously we'll see as a long way to go in the election. The AEC stuff, Covid-wise, I think some of this stuff will change because we're seeing New Year's of Wales and Victoria and I think also the ACT changing Covid isolation rules in the last couple of days and in the next couple of days, I think the ACT. The AEC have been talking a lot about massively boosting mobile voting, phone polling, that sort of thing. So I think there'll be some changes to that. But obviously they're very mindful there might be a lot of people in isolation or sick or in hospital or what have you than in previous years. They also talk about a lot of really basic stuff like, you know, all these hundreds of thousands of bottles of hand sanitizer they're giving out at polling places and more pencils and pens and what have you. So I think it'll be really interesting to see what happens with AEC this time around. Yeah. OK. All good. I guess about the liberal candidate in Warringa. I totally agree with your analysis that they don't want anywhere near a camera. But am I the only one who senses there might be a controlled detonation of the candidate at some point in the not too distant future? By that, I mean she may bob up with an interview in a favorable news outlet in order to address your point. You'd have to. Yeah, I mean, I don't know. I'm speculating and making clear, obviously, to listeners that we're recording this episode on Thursday afternoon and then the episode will drop on Saturday. So before the front page of the Daily Telegraph. Well, I'm just I'm just I'm just curious, right, because it's sort of like there is this problem, as Josh says, right. We've got this high octane ridiculousness of, you know, treating this candidate like she's, you know, a Hollywood celebrity kind of under a blanket in the back of the car. At some point, one imagines she will have to be put out somewhere. Yeah. Well, like how do you get her out of witness protection? It can't be there forever. That's the point. There was also the suggestion in the press conference today with the prime minister that it was liberal campaign, which was silencing. There were a ring a candidate, not not the public. And Scott Morrison was asked directly, is this true? And he didn't answer it. So he, you know, he used a lot of his usual lines about, you know, supporting the candidate, having been in touch with the candidate. But he didn't actually say whether it was the liberals themselves who were not allowing Catherine Deaves to speak. Respect. Yes. Very good point. And and yes. Oh, no, no. Well, hang on. Hang on. We're going to introduce Amy properly. Amy's got a bunch of questions coming up, and she's also going to have thoughts on Griffiths because I think she'll explode if she doesn't. But I just know that Queenslander and we understand that, darling. But first and first and foremost, because Amy's been away for a few months, I just want to welcome her back to the live blog coverage, which, of course, is magnificent as always. And back to the hive mind that is this political team in Canberra. So Amy's up. Start with Griffiths, Darls, and then we'll do your questions. On Griffith, and I'm not disputing anything that Josh said, the Greens always think they can win Griffith. It's kind of the same as points that Sarah has made about Boothby in Adelaide, where Labor always thinks that they can win Boothby and it always ends up being the status quo. It's the same with Griffith. It's good to it. It's good to have big dreams. I think the difference with Boothby is that people in Adelaide never think they can win Boothby. It's people at HQ who occasionally think that they can win Boothby. But this time it's a bit different for Boothby. Yeah, I mean, like the Greens have increased their vote in Queensland. They now have a state representative in the parliament for the first time. And they have taken a seat in that area in Griffith. They took it from Jackie Tradd, who is quite closely aligned with Terry Butler, which has given a bit of impetus to this push. But at the moment on the ground, there doesn't seem to be that much of a scare within the labor campaign that they are going to lose Griffith. There's always that worry, but it doesn't seem to be translating to the point where they're battening down the hatches. OK, very interesting. Now, Amy, you've got two questions. The first is on aged care, and this is from Nola Chilcott. Hi, Nola. My parents had an ACAT assessment over six months ago and received a level three assessment for their home care package. It has still not been processed. My mum is 90 in July. Hello, Nola's mum. Why is home care taking so long and what assistance is there for my parents now? That's your first question. Obviously, we don't need to get into the weeds of ACAT assessments, but we get that. We get the drift. The second question is from Ginger. And it concerns the Solomons that we referenced a minute or two ago and this security pact that it has been struck with China. So Ginger says the Solomons, this is a game changer in the Pacific. What is the foreign minister being doing? Well, isn't isn't that a question for the ages? I'll start with Nola. Hi. Hi, Nola. I'm sorry that you and your family are going through this. It's something that thousands of Australian families are going through at the moment. And the very short answer to your question is why is your mum not receiving the home care package she's been approved for? Is because of staffing shortage shortages. There just isn't the staff to be able to enact all of these home care packages that have been, you know, awarded to people, rightly awarded to people. And Chris Nous did a great story on this very recently for The Guardian, where he basically was pointing out that of the six point five billion dollars that the federal government promised for an extra 80,000 home care packages over the next couple of years, staff shortages has meant that the vast majority of those are not are not being met as yet. He actually reported that the total number of home care providers has actually decreased in the past year by about 17, which doesn't seem like a lot. But if you're in an area outside of metropolitan like cities, that could be the only provider that you had available region. Or it might have meant that you went from two providers to one. And that that's huge when you consider the growing number of people who need care at home. So it's one of those issues that has kind of been popping up in the election campaign, but not to the level that it should, in that we keep hearing questions to the labor campaign of how they're going to meet all their promises for extra nursing staff in terms of the urgent care clinics that they have promised and the melanoma clinics and putting a registered nurse in every aged care home 24 hours, seven days a week as the Royal Commission recommended. But we're not seeing those same questions applied to the to the government, to the coalition about how they are going to meet what is already a staffing shortage in the in the care sector generally, but particularly in aged care. This is a massive issue for Australia. It's not going to be solved just by bringing in more foreign carers. It does need to have a lot more training and money and time put into this sector. And we're just not seeing those commitments at the moment. Yes. And whichever side of power wins on the 21st, it's it's a huge issue. So thank you, Nala, for that question now to Ginger and the Solomon to Ginger and the Solomons. Where was Maurice Payne? Well, Maurice Payne, to be fair, is as Daniel Hearst and Kate Lyons have reported, has been in contact with her Solomon Island counterpart. Where was she while this was all happening when Zzezelja was sent? She was on the campaign. And we know that Maurice Payne was on the campaign because her own people have been sending out photos of Maurice Payne at campaign events. Andrew Clannell from Sky News asked the prime minister why Maurice Payne was at a LNP fundraiser on the day that Zzezelja was flown out to Solomon Islands. Wasn't particularly an answer for that. Again, we've just fallen back on the we've been in constant contact and we're doing everything that we can. But I think given the U.S. response and who they have sent, like they're sending their big diplomatic guns with Kurt Campbell, we've had a lot of interest from the United States, I suppose. Even New Zealand has certainly, you know, popped up in this space as well. There's going to be a lot of questions, I think, about whether an election campaign got in the way of Australia's diplomatic response to this. Yes, indeed. Now, we're on the clock, guys, so we're going to freeform a couple real fast. And I just I wanted them on the list of questions today because they're just they're very substantial questions and their issues that are not really necessarily front and center in what's happening in the election campaign at the moment. From a Twitter account called Just Science, this this observation, we're in transition from no covid vaccination to high vaccination with better prophylactics. Has any politician laid out what that pathway looks like? Potential mortality has gone from 40,000 a year to less than 8,000 a year and dropping as the various wave waves diminish. Asking a question for the ages again, are we there yet when it comes to the pandemic? So that's one we'll freeform on. And also from Peter Stapleton, this this is actually about opinion polling, which I think is an important thing to keep front and center, given that none of us are absolutely certain that the data that we're collecting during the election is 100 percent accurate. So Peter observes, I think progress has been made on improving the national to PP. This is to partly preferred number in terms of accounting for undecideds. And that's referencing our process at Guardian Essential. But I think there's still too much focus on it. What are things looking like at the state level as things move to are things moving in the right places for a change of government? A very acute question. So anyway, covid, are we there yet, guys? No, I mean, we're certainly seeing obviously there's changes in restrictions for New South Wales and Victoria. And there's obviously a lot of talk about us moving from the pandemic stage to the endemic stage of the virus. Certainly doesn't mean it's not harmless, but it does mean that we will live with it in a different way than how we have over the past couple of years. I also feel like even if we do have another difficult wave over winter, I don't feel that there'd be any public appetite at all for reintroduction of restrictions. Yeah, I think this is governments will be treating it in a very different way as well. This is a question I've got. Yeah, it's kind of like if there is all of a sudden some I mean, God forbid, some horrendous variant. You know, what do governments do then? Have we heard? I haven't heard it. I haven't really thought about this until the question. I haven't heard a single politician talk about this on the election yet. That's why I put it on the question. I just this this thing has been around in our lives for two and a half years. I haven't had a single question about it. Like you see, obviously, people wearing masks at press conferences and that sort of thing, but I haven't heard any apology even be asked a question or say anything about it. I think everyone's just sick of talking. Because I think the the lockdowns, which are sort of unprecedented, were until we had a vaccine and then there was a vaccine and then most people, 90 percent plus, got vaccinated. And then they feel they've done their part. They've done all they can. And then the social license for those other things that are huge in positions just just falls away. Now, maybe we still should be doing things like masks that aren't a great imposition. And and for the record, we are fully masked and ventilated in this recording. We should be doing those things. But yeah, it's completely dropped off the radar, even though, you know, more than 4000 people have died this year, which is, you know, more than double in the first two years of the of the pandemic. But no, it's not really an issue. I think we just sort of the political conversation has moved into the endemic stage where they're just going to cop that amount. Having said that, on today, this Thursday, Philadelphia and the United States is reintroducing mask mandates for inside because their cases are starting to get out of control again. And there's too much pressure on the health care system already. And they're just trying to get ahead of the wave. And I kind of feel that the United States is starting to look at doing that, even though, of course, they have their own court issues and all the rest of it. I think we could start to see some mandates in terms of masks and things like that if our health care systems are not with upstanding up to any future covid outbreaks. Yeah, well, it's sort of the key the key question about winter, isn't it really like whether the combo of flu season and covid plus any variants sort of changes the calculation? But anyway, we foregrounded this question because it is important and and bizarrely, despite this being the collective obsession of the world for the last two years, it's all of a sudden we've hit this fatigue point. But both sides are kind of saying all the sunnier days ahead. You know, like neither of them want to say, you know, it could be back to this awful time. Like Labor's always talking about, you know, failures on vaccines or what have you. But like they don't want to talk about masks and lockdowns and, you know, doom and gloom. Yeah, exactly. All right. Polls, guys, do we believe them? The bit I believe is the 30 percent of people still undecided or voting for others or independents. Yeah, I think like honestly, I think, you know, the lesson the lesson we've applied corporately at The Guardian is watch the undecideds foreground, the undecideds in every piece of research that you say. But Peter raised a really interesting point, and that is, you know, this sort of weird situation that we've got in Australia, because data is so poor. Let's be honest. You know, we make much of the national metrics and opinion polls. Right. What is the national two party preferred or in our poll two party preferred class tells you bugger all actually about what's happening, because what's happening is happening state by state and seat by seat. And yet nobody is producing reliable seat polls that would enable us to be able to accurately chart, you know, the trajectory of an election. So, you know, I don't know, has anyone seen any decent seat polls or, you know, some innovation that would help us in this regard? No. And I think the thing people have to keep in mind is that swings are never uniform. So even if there were a uniform swing of three percent nationally, you're going to see seats further up the pendulum fall on margins larger than three percent. And you can see that in where the leaders are campaigning. I mean, Anthony Albanese was in Benalong today trying to, you know, because John Alexander is retiring and they think that's a winnable seat, even though it's on a larger margin. You look at the coalition's list that they're briefing out about how they're going to retain government by winning, you know, lions, McEwen seats that are on five percent margins that they hope to go the other way. So, you know, they know they know that it's not just, you know, a dozen seats in play. There are more seats in play than that. And I think the state story is going to be very interesting, particularly when WA, you know, polls close last. There are a few hours behind, reports a few hours later. But that is looking like the most fertile ground for labor, potentially, with three seats on a margin of about five and a half percent less and expecting a swing. And then we just saw the labor campaign spend almost a week in Queensland, which, you know, some of the margins there are just absolutely astronomical. And you wouldn't expect to see any seats really change to labor, given what happened in the last election. But we did just see the labor campaign dedicate almost a week in in Queensland, particularly in southeast Queensland. And there's a reason for that is because they sense with the floods that there is opportunity for change there. And I do have to say again, as the Queenslander, I know it's seen as a conservative state, but it has had progressive state governments for the vast majority of the last couple of decades. It's not a conservative stronghold. It just really did not like Bill Shorten at the last election. Josh, did you have a thought? No, not particularly. No, no, no. The Greens have knocked on twenty thousand doors in Griffith. But you shouldn't have. That's a really good point. I mean, I've been fascinated in how how much both sides, Paul mentioned WA, how much both sides are already pandering to WA. Every time Scott Morrison goes over there, he just, you know, falls over to say how much we love WA. And all you guys are so good. And the forever deal. And even I was fascinated this week that he again, he's turned around one of these labor lines and just like switched the names out of like one of those lines the whole way through. It's been like Scott Morrison sided with Palmer against WA. And Morrison turned around this weekend. I think one of the Chamber of Commerce events he was at and he said Albo sided against Mark McGowan and West Australians on I can't remember what the issue was. It was something. Greenfields industrial relations. Oh, yes. Industrial relations. Something about mining. Yeah. It's really interesting. Just, you know, I was just one of these ones that kept flipping it around. But yeah, I think that's a really interesting factor. Like he's now trying to say, you know, Mark McGowan and me are our best buddies. So I think the West is interesting because six months ago, labor, you know, labor and the coalition were saying, you know, five seats could be in play over there. And that's massively stepped back now. And I know last election, you know, labor was also pretty confident, but they weren't sure which seats, which was kind of problematic. But now I think both sides are sort of more in the two or three. Polls agitated. The individual seat polls suggest, you know, Tangy is in play, which is on a stonking 10 or 11 percent margin. So we come back to the original. Yes. The original point. Either those polls are wrong or we're going to see strange things. Josh Frydenberg losing Ku Yong, the liberals losing North Sydney, you know, if they are to be believed, which, you know, I don't think necessarily. Yeah. And Murphy, your visit to Tasmania and talking to those undecided voters was really interesting because both parties are throwing absolutely everything at it, thinking they have a shot. And what you found was that they're both kind of just like, yeah, about both sides. Mega Mayor. So anyway, yeah, look, it is anyway, genuinely fascinating. Now, last one, Paul, very quickly, just because you did the fact check, I docked you in for this one because you did the fact check on it. When Morrison claims sorry, this is from an account called Truthseeker. When Morrison claims that he saved 40,000 lives, what modeling is he using to prove that direct intervention by the federal government only achieve this? Does this assume no vaccines? Does it assume that he influenced the state's management? Where did this number come from? So this number is comparing the number of deaths in Australia in 2020 and 2021 with the average in the OECD. If we had had that average applied to our population, we would have had, you know, 40,000 deaths. So that that's how it's calculated. Morrison doesn't exactly say, you know, I personally save these lives or only through the federal government's actions, what his lives say. What do you mean? What do you mean he doesn't? He says, you know, the Australian pandemic response did that and then leaves it implicit that, you know, brackets, that means me, folks. So obviously, the federal government did some things like closing the borders and convening national cabinet and ordering vaccines. It didn't it didn't drive every aspect of the covid response. The states drove the lockdowns and a lot and the the interstate border closures that kept parts of the country relatively covid free for that whole two years. So it's not a it's not a Morrison solo achievement. It's a federal Australian achievement. An achievement of the Federation. Yes. Yes. And as long as it's understood in that context, then, you know, it's it's it's not wrong, per se. It is it is it is slightly misleading, though, because there are a bunch of countries in the OECD like Mexico that we don't normally compare ourselves to. We normally aim to have better medical outcomes then. So there are some countries that didn't have such a great pandemic that drag the OECD. Average down. Yes. Up. Yes. Up. Not down. Up. Up. OK, fascinating achievements of the Federation and all that. Well, thank you, guys. Thank you to everybody who sent questions this week. Obviously, we cannot get to all of them. I apologize for that, but we hope we've run through a representative sample of things that you really want answered in the campaign context. We'll do another episode, of course, next week. So, you know, put your thinking caps on and keep us on our toes. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of the show. Thank you to you guys for listening and we'll see you again next Saturday.