 This is The Guardian. It all comes together in the northern New South Wales and south east Queensland floods. Climate change meets government incompetence meets lack of planning. And it's going to stand there as a living testament to government failure over the next few weeks and months. This has been obviously been catastrophic for the people that live in the flood regions but I actually also think it's been catastrophic for the Prime Minister. Hi, welcome to Australian Politics. You might be thinking this doesn't sound like Catherine Murphy and that would be right. I'm Paul Karp. I'm a political reporter at Guardian Australia, filling in while Murphy's on the road in Tasmania. Today we're bringing you a panel from the Guardian Essential Poll. This is a discussion we have every couple of weeks where we talk about what numbers are standing out to us and what the results mean. This comes from a webinar hosted by progressive think tank the Australia Institute with analysis from essential director Peter Lewis. This week we looked at how Morrison's response to the floods has underwhelmed voters and how this has fuelled fear that climate disasters will leave communities worse off without significant government action. This talk was recorded on Tuesday and it was moderated by Ebony Bennett, the Deputy Director of the Australia Institute and Ebony asks me the first question now. I will take us just to domestic politics for a bit. We're only one week out from the budget and probably only a month and a bit away from a federal election. Where are we sitting at at the moment in terms of national politics? What are some of the issues dominating the national debate? Well, Scott Morrison has tried to improve the federal government's flood response by announcing cash payments for people in affected areas and to start to unlock the resilience fund that Labor has criticised them for not having spent enough of. He's also been crisscrossing the country, travelling to states that hadn't let him in previously because of COVID rules in the case of Western Australia. He's also up in Queensland. These are for things announcing city deals, infrastructure projects, trying to get headlines in those states and associate himself with popular premiers like Mark McGowan in the case of WA. So he's in campaign mode ahead of the budget. They're also giving a little bit more ahead of time of what's going to be in the budget, perhaps because Shane Warren's state funeral is going to be the day after and they think to get the budget bounced they have to start making some of the announcements now because that might cramp their style. Probably a fair assessment, Paul. Shane Warren mourned by even Mick Jagger. Pretty beloved. Well, yeah, the breakfast TVs are making their choice about whether to be there for warning or day two of budget coverage and have gone with warning. So that's the pickle they're in. And just wanted to unpack a little bit those results from South Australia on the weekend. So there's always those regular caveats about not reading too much into a federal election from a state result, but very significant in that it is the first incumbent government to go kind of since the pandemic began. What's your kind of analysis of the wash up there? Yeah, so a decent swing to labor, a big swing. And they were campaigning on issues of health funding and cost of living issues, which are going to be very prominent in federal labor's campaign. Scott Morrison's defense of this is, oh, well, Anthony Albanese is no Peter Malinowska. So he doesn't he doesn't think there is a federal implication. And there is only one marginal federal seat in South Australia, the seat of Boothby. But I think it shows that if a campaign is fought on those issues, that labor has more of a natural advantage in service delivery and cost of living issues. And so that's a bad sign for the coalition federally who wants to talk more about national security. And if they do want to talk about the economy, it's more the jobs number rather than the hip pocket concerns that they want to be talking about. Yeah, well, we might duck into the slides now with you, Pete. So this first question that we've got is tracking over time the approval of Scott Morrison as PM. What are the results show here, Pete? Well, he's still in that negative, which was foreign territory for him through most of the last couple of years. Look back to February last year, 65% 28 approved, disapprove. He's dropped 20 points off that and he's added 20 on the disapproval column. So there was like 1% movement. That doesn't mean anything. That's just noise. But he is in net negative. And if you go to the next slide at the moment, Anthony Albanese is in net positive, which is also new territory for him. What does that mean? It means that the I think the opposition leader does have the wind behind him. We'll talk about some of maybe the side drafts over last week, a bit later. I see that where we are at the moment is that we've got an unpopular Prime Minister and a opposition leader who is becoming increasingly known. And the more that people know about him, the more they're inclined to trust him with their vote. If we then move along to preferred PM, much movement in these numbers? There isn't really, is there? There's a little bit one point either way. What I can though tell you is this is the best performance in terms of preferred PM and opposition leader has had in quite some time. So before the May 2019 election, it was Morrison 39 short and 32. So Albo is four better than that. It was 39 31 before the July 2016 election that Turnbull won. Abbott v Rudd was 41 22 to Abbott, believe it. That's a long time ago. Actually that was PM opposition. So I think it was actually Rudd was ahead of Abbott but he won anyway. And Gillard was ahead of Abbott 47 35 in September 2010. So he is huge. Kind of a change from last week, but certainly a positive trend overall. Look, it's, I hate preferred PM as a tool. I think we've spoken about this in the past. Preferred PM is asking you to rate somebody who is PM with someone who isn't and make an objective judgment. It's an easy one that we put in. I'm not quite sure what we do, but there it is. And it says that in terms of recent history, he's as well positioned as any opposition leader, including a couple of one elections. I want to come now, Pete, to the floods. Obviously we've seen huge and just devastating scenes from Lismore and elsewhere along the East Coast. So you've asked this question overall, how would you rate the federal government's response to recent flooding in Queensland and New South Wales? Take us through these figures. The short answer is nothing special. 5% of people think it's been very good. 21% quite good. 41% in the poor or very poor column. Again, if you're playing from home, you can have a look at some of the cross tabs that we've got on essentialreport.com.au, particularly amongst coalition voters. The number that think it's poor is 21%. You'd be concerned with that. I've got a piece up in The Guardian at the moment where I'm calling the floods Scott Morrison's perfect political storm. I think if you look at some of the worst elements of his prime ministership, which he has so adapted, turning into quotable quotes, it's colder, don't be afraid. I don't hold a hose. It's not a race. It all comes together in the Northern New South Wales and Southeast Queensland floods. Climate change meets government incompetence, meets lack of planning. It's going to stand there as a living testament to government failure over the next few weeks and months. This isn't going to be cleaned up anytime soon. I think this has been, it's obviously been catastrophic for the people that live in the flood regions, but I actually also think it's been catastrophic for the prime minister. It's a proof point of his weaknesses as a leader, but it is also a reminder that if you want to run on national leadership in a time of war or pandemic, you actually don't have the runs on the board to say, I'm the safe choice. I think it's very, very dangerous for the prime minister. I've just come back from Western Australia, talking to voters in marginal seats. And yeah, one event in politics or your handling of one issue rarely do dooms you to defeat, but when something becomes a pattern, then that can harm you. And the problem with the floods is that I was hearing from voters, even in Western Australia, a million miles from where the floods were, that this brought back to their minds the handling of the bushfires. I think people were more likely to mention the Hawaii holiday because there was another natural disaster going on that they didn't think that the prime minister was handling particularly well. So likely to solidify people's poor impression of his leadership. Yeah, if you actually look at this term of government, it's basically been a global pandemic bookended by two catastrophic climate events. And that's the story. Yeah. If you think about it, which I hadn't in those terms, it's quite something, isn't it? But Paul, I was just going to come back to your point there. I mean, Catherine Murphy often talks here about the longer that you're in government, the kind of more lead you accumulate in your saddlebags. So that's really what we're seeing here, isn't it? There was a bit of a pre-existing perception of the government not dealing with these issues now. And then everything subsequently is just kind of reinforcing that, I guess. And I don't think Scott Morrison has changed his campaign tactics from 2019 when he was an upset victory, because at that time he was campaigning as a relative clean skin. You know, Labor let him get away with reintroducing himself to the Australian public as Prime Minister, doing all the hokey photo ops. I mean, he's trying the same playbook this time. And I just think that voters seeing him wash hair and make gnocchi at the Formula One or the NASCAR or whatever it was, it clashes now because they're like, but don't you have a job? Aren't you the Prime Minister? You know, don't we want to hear about how you've been doing in that job and not the photo ops of doing everyone else's? Yeah. And the government response, if you can just unpack that a little bit, because some of the perceptions, I guess, were that it took a while for the Army to be on the ground. There was that issue of Byron and Ballina missing out on emergency disaster relief that looked partisan, especially in the light of other car park rorts and sports rorts and all those kinds of things. How much has the government been able to ameliorate some of this with handouts and other responses? Or is it just all a bit of a soup at the moment? Well, I think they've rectified Byron and Ballina. But yeah, it's the problem of having missed out at first instance that leads people to be concerned that there's a partisan basis for it. And, you know, the Army call out, it was again, will remind people of the that issue in the bushfires where it became a federal state thing. You know, is he blaming the premiers for not having called the Army and sooner? Didn't we have legislation that was to fix that to allow the Commonwealth to act more unilaterally in that sort of situation? Did that not go far enough? Or was that trigger not pulled? Why was that not pulled? And it's one of those things where even if the states could have called them out sooner, that he's the Prime Minister, so he'll get blamed for that. Pete, keeping on this theme, you've got a couple of questions here related to attitudes to the floods in Queensland and New South Wales. Right at the top, if there isn't significant action on climate change soon, we can expect flooding in Australia to be even worse in the future. About half of respondents agreeing with that. What are these other attitudes that we're talking about? It's really interesting when you see 57% support and you go, well, what about the other people? But there's 18% that are disagreeing and then you've got 25% that are either neutral or unsure. And just the reason we're asking this is just to test the salience of some of the arguments that we on the progressive side of the movement attempted to run out during these sorts of events. And I think it's just a reminder that we can't assume that everybody sees the world the same way. And there's obviously persuasion pieces that need to occur as well. I was surprised at the strength of the coal message there. So we asked the question if we're serious about reducing the future impact of floods. Australia needs to replace coal with renewables as soon as possible. 53% are up for that. I was surprised it wasn't higher. 18% against and against the others sitting on the fence. And then the final one we asked, and these are statements that we're checking degree of support or disapproval. We call it a five point spread from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The government has contributed to the extent of the recent flooding in Queensland and New South Wales by not doing enough about climate change. So that's one's actually not just sheeting responsibility for the response, but sheeting responsibility for the actual impact of the floods. And that's 46% of people agreeing. Yeah, 26% disagreeing. And so that is getting close to you know, a national majority that don't just see a flood and say the government needs to do something, but see a flood and says the government has caused it. So that's interesting. Paul, does anything stand out to you from those responses there? Well, I mean, what stands out to me is that the Prime Minister at the first town hall that he did at Skye was saying that we should be keeping the coal power plants going as long as possible. So although Peter, you're surprised that it's not higher than 53%? It's a killing majority, isn't it? Yeah. It shows the problem that he has that he's still trying to talk to the plurality or the minority that disagree on that question. So that one stands out to me. And yes, although it is a minority to be blaming the government that directly is, would be also a very concerning result at the bottom. Yeah. I mean, it's not far away from one in two people. That's got to be concerning you about reinforcing perception of some of the failures of the government. Pete, walk me through this next one on some truthiness. This is my truthiness slide. So my other caution with all these numbers is that I don't think Morrison's dead yet and that his persona of SCOMO is his greatest protection. I've been observing in focus groups in recent weeks are really interesting tell. If people call him SCOMO, they're more likely and these are low information, low engagement voters. But if they call him SCOMO at the start, they're more likely to say, well, you can't blame him. No one could have seen the pandemic going. He's tried really hard. So that sort of persona that he's built is a really effective insurance policy for him in terms of keeping at least, you know, people look at the polls and go, well, how can you even have 40% plus still approving? It's because they see SCOMO. They don't see a prime minister not doing his job. So in that context, I think it's interesting to us. So what do you believe? Because the point is the election won't be this considered policy debate. It is going to be a contest of competing realities. In SCOMO's reality, he's been a great leader through the pandemic. He looks great. He understands people. He supports the shark. He's an average guy who plays the ukulele. He's the sort of guy that we should have led in the country. So on that, I was just interested who believes what during an election campaign. So 27% of the electorate think that when they hear a politician, they're more likely or not to hear the truth. In contrast, 59% are likely to think it's a lie. Similar numbers, but a bit less in the lies on social media platforms, 26% truthy, 54% lies. The media rate's the highest. It's got 47%, which is still less than 50% Mr. Karp for your profession. 47% believe that if they're tuning into mainstream media, such as newspapers, TV and radio, I guess that includes News Limited, 47% think it is either largely or somewhat true, but 42% don't believe it. And the most trusted source is your friends and family, where we're up to at least the majority, 56% think it'll be largely true or very true, 27% untrue. My problem with that is our only source of truth is getting all their views of current affairs in the world from the other things that no one believes. So we've got this cycle of untruths and parallel realities. It's washing around us. And we're trying to come up with consensus and national purpose in a world where no one believes anything they're hearing from anyone. What do you make of that trust or untrustworthiness of the media there, Paul? Well, yeah, I think that trust in individual outlets, the results vary greatly. The ABC is generally more trusted than News Corp, for example, and we can't see that disambiguated in these results. But I definitely think that people sort of choose their own truth. And in talking to voters in WA, particularly people that were very anti-vaccine mandates, some of them were incredibly thoroughly researched. It's just that they were quoting highly questionable facts about died with versus died of COVID and incredibly selective use of official information or using discredited sources. So yeah, people choose what they want to believe. Pete, moving on to this next slide here and from the trust or otherwise in various people, you've asked here about the extent to which people support or oppose a couple of different issues, including truth in political advertising. That one looks like a winner. But like all of these are overwhelming support for action to deal with an ecosystem that is no longer trusted or truth based. So we're talking there, 79% either strongly support or support the proposition we should have laws requiring truth in political advertising. Now, there's been a few goes at that and it's been ruled, I think, unconstitutional, Paul. And I know it's something the Australia Institute has been pushing hard with their broader democracy project. But the second one, the laws requiring digital platforms such as Facebook to stop the spread of disinformation, 73% support. Actually, the government slipped out with little fanfare a proposal to do exactly that yesterday based on ACMA reviewing the industry self-regulation of disinformation, which has been carrying on for the last 18 months and has been totally impotent. So the government is now saying we are going to increase ACMA's powers to enforce the platforms to take more active measures on dangerous disinformation. And then the third one was the enforceable ethical standards for media companies, regardless of their television, online radio or print. And again, overwhelming support. This is 73% support. The last time this was tried was when Stephen Conroy was communications minister in News Limited, ended up putting him on the front dressed as Stalin because it becomes state control. The media hates the idea of any accountability. But I do think when we talk about disinformation, it's really easy just to talk about the platforms. And I love to talk about the platforms, because I think their business model is fundamentally broken and flawed. But we also need to talk about major news outlets that just do not have any accountability whatsoever and just see their accountability as being to give their readers what they want in a world where people are choosing their own truths. And I think we're seeing that playing out in some of the headlines that are just overwhelming us over the last week. Yeah, thanks, Pete. And just a word on truth in political advertising. There are certainly ways to get around those constitutional implications. And certainly at the state level, South Australia and the ACT already have existing truth in political advertising laws and other states are looking at it as well. So it's a bit of a live issue and always good to think about in the context of an election. We might just move on to these last couple of slides. We've got voting intentions. Yeah, these are like the funny pages. These are just the comics. So this is the two party preferred plus, two PP plus primary vote. As you can see, there are still 7% undecided. I don't get too carried away except to say, of those declared voters, the election is by no means over. When I talk to people about the actual seats, Labour needs to pick up. People find it hard to find a path to victory. But when you feel about the overall trend and the wave for change, there seems to be a chance. I think South Australia was interesting if you watched that election, just when the waves on seats go that you don't expect. So, you know, we're probably six weeks out now. I feel I've reached a degree of wisdom that should be described as Socratic. I've got no idea what happens. And I think this is our last one, two PP plus. Yeah, that's what we were talking about before. It's kind of, we have the stuff. But yeah, it's a bit different looking at it this way. There is a little gap there in the middle with the undecideds, I guess. So there you go. Like I say, I find this a great lodestar. I don't think that it's determinative. So it seems to me that Labour is as well positioned as an opposition could be leading up to an election. The Prime Minister is in significant strife with his personal regard. But there is still a lot of work. And I think it'll be an interesting election where Labour is really trying to make it a referendum on the Prime Minister. And I'm interested to see where the energy and the enthusiasm in the campaign comes from. And that's obviously something that we'll see over the coming months. But when you've got an opposition that's consciously made the choice not to run a big policy agenda, what are people going to get excited about? Yeah, we'll move to questions from the audience just in a moment. Paul, I did want to come back to you. Obviously, we're not far away from a budget. But Pete was talking there, you know, the election is probably going to be called pretty soon after the budget. Shane Warren's funeral the day after the budget means that they're trying to sprook a lot of things now and they're not going to have the usual free air that they do to kind of promote the budget. How much of a problem is that in a budget where they're kind of expected to be buying votes, so to speak, a bit of a handing out candy and doing as much as they can, leaving nothing on the field so that they're heading into the election in a strong position. I think it is a big problem because their efforts to tackle the cost of living sound like they're going to be handouts in the budget like cash payments to welfare recipients or low and middle income earners, and possibly also a temporary suspension of the or reduction in the petrol excise tax. And so you want to get credit for that. If you're trying to buy votes, you want to get credit for it. You don't want people to go to the petrol pump and be paying $2 a liter for petrol and not realizing that you've actually taken 20 cents off the excise tax for them to get that bargain basement price of $2 a liter. So yeah, anything that prevents them getting the message out about what they gave people in the budget is a worry. And again, I think that they're trying to follow the 2019 playbook in terms of the timetable of using the budget as a springboard to the election is exactly what they did last time. But there's just so much going on, like news wise with the pandemic and Ukraine and floods that I'm not sure that people are as focused on the choice as the Morrison government would like in order to get value for what they're giving away and to create fear about the alternative. I just wonder how much money they can give to move the needle. Like I just think sending a check even for, you know, 500 or 1000 bucks, does that change the way people see the government? I don't know. Well, and it also has the risk of adding to inflation and the business lobby like the Chamber of Commerce and Industry have said not to do it because then it increases the likelihood that interest rates will rise. That would be the nightmare scenario for Scott Morrison would be an interest rate rise in the campaign rather than after it because they splashed too much money in the budget. And is it, you know, obviously, coalitions meaning government for many, many terms now and it certainly all the way up until the pandemic hit rested its laurels on its economic management on the fact that it cared about debt and deficit. It was for small government and not a lot of spending. To what extent do voters care that splashing cash like this is kind of contrary to everything that they're supposed to believe in. Is there any issue there in terms of economic management being a really strong area supposedly for the coalition? You know, how much has that been undermined by how they've behaved during the pandemic where they have really had big interventions, big public spending programs? I think they could lose a few votes over that. Some people might flirt more with the sort of right wing reactionary parties more if they're concerned about debt. And you also, if people think that the money was poorly targeted, like you do still hear voters talking about, sure JobKeeper was great, but didn't companies get that that turned out not to need it and wasn't a lot of that wasted. So even middle of the road undecided voters are susceptible to Labor's messaging about like, well, spending is fine, but like it's got to be targeted or it's waste. I've got a question here that might be for you, Pete, and a quick one to deal with straight up. It's from John McGee asking, do the 7% undecided relate in any way to the 5% informal vote? Look, we don't know. That's a fair assumption. It would be interesting to test, do you intend to vote informal? Maybe we'll do that one time just to see what it looks like actually. But I think it's really important when we do our polling just to look at all these different groups who are disengaged. I think you should ask that because I think there's going to be a record informal vote this time because informal votes are usually people who don't understand how to fill it out correctly. Whereas I think this time you're going to get those people and people that are doing it intentionally because they're upset at how involved the government was in the pandemic response. I met a lot of voters who were saying that they do not want to express the preference between Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese. And for them, preferences aren't a way of preserving the value of their vote. It is an illegitimate way that their vote for minor parties and independents is being funneled to someone that they don't want to help elect. So I think a lot of people will number a couple of boxes and then just stop. The next question I've got is from Alastair McCulloch. He asks, how much impact do you think Russia's invasion of Ukraine is going to have given the tendency for wars to help the party in power and also to some extent governments of a conservative persuasion? Paul, I might throw that one to you first. I think that when it first broke out, everyone thought, oh well, the coalition's finally got their khaki election. That's a boon for them. But I think counterintuitively, it hasn't worked out that way for a few reasons. I mean, first of all, the response is completely bipartisan. Labor supported absolutely everything they did. Second of all, it does feel quite remote to people being in Europe and the links to the fact that this might make China's aggressive action more likely. I don't think that's really been driven home and people accept or feel that as a real threat. The other thing is, although Labor's only a little bit ahead in voting intention, time is running out to set this election up as being a referendum on, we don't know what Anthony Albanese is going to do, which is the way Morrison wants to frame it. Perhaps he has some insidious plan in mind, like they accused Shorten of wanting to introduce an inheritance tax. I just think that it occupies so much of the news and it sucked up so much of the oxygen on an issue where the parties don't disagree and is taking time away from the PM to frame the election as being about Albanese. That's the critical question. It's who needs the airspace more? So I think there is no difference in the public's eyes between the major parties in handling Ukraine. I think the government's had a crack at trying to drag it back to China. Our polling a few weeks ago said that people actually think Labor would do a better job in the coalition of managing that complex relationship anyway, but it does take oxygen out of the news cycle. So the question is, does Labor need the oxygen to establish Anthony Albanese as an alternate prime minister more than Morrison needs the oxygen to make Albanese a threat? Because I don't think we need any more airtime to make out the case on who Scott Morrison is and the sort of leader he is. It's really about who is going to benefit more by having a focus on the alternative. I'd love to say I knew the answer to that. I don't, but I do think that as it stands at the moment, it's more the space it feels rather than the issue itself that is relevant. Yeah. And as you said, Pete, past polls, you've kind of asked a lot of questions around that idea of a party election and there wasn't actually much in it there. The next question I've got is from Ian Paulin and there's a couple of others that are back to this idea of the budget and the timing of it. So Ian says, I know the budget is supposed to make a difference to political fortunes, but on this occasion and for this election, is it a bit more irrelevant and is it too little too late? So we've talked about some of the other competing things there, but yeah, Paul, what are the opportunities for the government to really shift the needle on some of that lead and the saddlebags that we were talking about earlier? I think last time people thought, oh, it's a budget, but how could that possibly cleanse them of the record of having dumped another prime minister and the chaos and all the rest of it? But then, you know, the campaign rolled around and all the money came out for the community car parks and the sports grants and those things gave them lots to campaign on at a local level in individual electorates. So I think we're likely to see that again, hopefully not as egregiously brought it as with color-coded spreadsheets, but I do think it helps to give them something to campaign on, but it depends whether people vote based on what they think they personally will get or whether they're more concerned with the record across the last three years. I reckon there's the national budget and there's the campaign budget. So the national budget is really how, you know, the last pre-election budget was the back in black budget where they had a heroic statement that in some time in the future, which has obviously never occurred, the budget would be back in the black. What is that great iconic thing? Is it 2% unemployment as opposed to 3%? My problem with running on unemployment as your political shangrel are is that the only time people care about unemployment is when they don't have a job and when unemployment is low, by definition, there's fewer people concerned about unemployment. So I'm not sure if that works for them. They can't run on debt. They can't run interest rates. You're only going to go one way. They might have something big on housing affordability, but it will be quite targeted and incremental over time. What else have they got? I don't know, tax. They could throw some tax money at people. Then you've got the campaign budget, which is tax cuts meets boondoggling. And of course they're going to run that line again. This is where I think there will be an onus on the media to be calling it out in real time and not just being going along for the photo op ride. But it is also where I think Labor has caught up with them. And they are making a series of announcements as the nine papers have rolled out that are very calculated as well politically. So I think last time the Libs had a free run at this game. And I don't think Labor, as in everything they're doing, they're being very, very disciplined and match hard. And then they're not going to give them free runs this time at all. Yeah. And I know the other another concerning thing in terms of tax cuts at the election, we've already got baked into the budget, these big kind of almost $200 billion worth of income tax cuts that are yet to actually come in, mostly benefit, wealthier Australians. And then, you know, potentially we might have cuts, additional cuts to the company tax cuts or additional income tax cuts. And while we've got some windfall profits coming in from commodities, thanks to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, helping actual receipts and government revenue, that's kind of building a real revenue problem for future governments down the track when things take a downturn. The next question that I've got, Paul, I might give to you. It's from Mel Smith asking, about the impact of the bullying allegations with regards to Kimberley Kitching. Where is that up to as we speak? I think it's unlikely to shift votes. It does make it harder for Labor to make the argument about the government's treatment of women, you know, too slow to implement the Jenkins inquiry recommendations, that sort of argument. Many people know who she is or could say with the degree of specificity what it is that Labor figures are supposed to have done to her that warrants, you know, DEFCON 3, we must have an inquiry into the allegation. I'll just say there's three things here. There's a human tragedy, there's a factional power play, and there is an absolute concerted attempt to politicise it by the right of politics. And all those three things are happening at the same time, and it's really careful that you separate that out. So the real challenge for Labor is now to find a way of unify and not allow what has been an internally really traumatic incident to tear apart the opposition just as they're on the threshold of an election campaign when they're well positioned to win. That's going to be the real test of leadership for both Albanese and the other players in this, whether they allow News Limited and the Morrison government to take a personal tragedy and turn it into a political fireball. This one might be for you, Pete, and then to you, Paul, after that, Alan Coligato asks, which aspect of Morrison's prime ministership do people approve of? I'm not sure you necessarily ask that when you ask about approval, do you? Do we know anything else about what people approve of in terms of previous questions on issues? Oh, clearly some people like the vibe, they like the ukulele, they like that he's a daggy dad if he was. You know, I've looked to be to be fair, when Morrison's approvals was high was when he was taking advice in that first year of the pandemic and being prepared to change course and listen to experts and work collaboratively with the states. It was almost the George Costanza prime ministership where he did everything against his natural instincts. He did OK. Since then, he's reverted back to type of playing politics, which served him very well in 2019. It may serve him well again. We don't know what the future looks like. But in terms of his positive ratings, I'm not going to be able to go into much more depth than that. I might then come to this next question from Murray Coates, who asks back to that question I think you mentioned earlier, how does the percentage of each party translate into seats? So that was kind of where the commentary seemed to get into trouble last election. The national polling looked all right. And then when it got down to the seat level, there just wasn't the electorates there for Labour to win. Paul, how much of a concern is that for Labour this time around or are the poll results looking kind of comfortable enough that enough seats are in play? Yeah, so last time there was a swing to Labour in some seats, but they were held on very large margins. And so they were seats that didn't help Labour in the end, in the inner city particularly. And we might see a lot of that again this time, particularly in a state like Queensland, where with the exception of Longman and a few other seats, most are held by the coalition on very large margins. So it would take a very large statewide swing to get lots of Labour gains in Queensland. That said, I do think that there are enough seats in Northern Tasmania, Chisholm in Victoria, Reid in Robertson in New South Wales, in WA, Swan, Pierce, Hasluck and Boosby in South Australia that we were talking about, that majority government is a possibility without having an outsized double digit swing to Labour. I don't think they need to pick up three or four seats in Queensland. Pete, anything you want to add to that? Yeah, the question is whether there's enough, if there's a five or six percent swing, whether the coalition could sandbag enough seats to still stay into power. How will they sandbag it with targeted campaigning, negative campaigning, big advertising buys and, you know, pork? They've got all those assets. If they do it well, they can sandbag. If it is close, I still predict the government will hold on. Labour needs to win well and they win well, yes, with lots of seats winning but with the tide for change. And that's where I think we're at the moment. You can find the seats when you sort of start imagining that swing, but it is really hard to say, you know, there might be three or four in WA, but put two in the bag. SAA Boothby hasn't really changed for over 50 years. The Tassie seats, there's a couple there that you might get. There's probably only one in Victoria and you're right. Then at least you've got to hold on to what you've got in New South Wales and find a way to win a few in Queensland. It's hard. It's not as easy as it looks for just reading the polls. Changing government is really, really hard in Australia. The other thing I would say is that there seemed to be a swing against Labour in their heartland and against the Liberals in their heartland last time. And some of that I think is reverting back to the historical trend as in like, I don't think Labour's boat has continued to erode in West and South West Sydney. But on the Liberal side of the equation, I don't think it's reverting back. And it was a one election blip. I mean, people were voting because they were concerned the Coalition weren't doing enough on climate. And I think they're still facing a challenge in the inner city, both from the independence, but also from from Labour and seats like Higgins and even like North Sydney, which is unthinkable. I grew up there and it's a very conservative area. So I do think that over a few elections, the climate issue has has bitten the coalition. Although showing my age, Ted Mac was a long term independent representative of North Sydney up until the point that Cheryl Hockie found a way into parliament. And, you know, I think the teal independence are the other wild card. And, you know, we've spoken about this before in this forum, they provide a handbrake on the coalition's worst excesses. And they're also a real threat in terms of numbers in the in the parliament. Speaking of climate, I do have a couple of questions here that go back to that issue of climate change. Paul, obviously, with the floods and from those results we've seen today in Guardian Essential, people are making their connection a lot more strongly between extreme weather events and climate. We've got the teal independent candidates running in a lot of safe liberal seats and a budget about to come up where, you know, we've got the Great Barrier Reef bleaching 40 degrees above average in Antarctica and a government still bestowing millions of dollars in public money to expand gas fields in Australia. There's still no evidence really of any kind of shift in policy that would match that 2050 commitment that they made so much a meal out of at Glasgow. Yeah. And we were just as the rest of the world was lifting their ambition on 2030. We finally got the policy of net zero by 2050, but it relies on heroic assumptions about technology. And meanwhile, we're opening up new gas fields, which will make it more difficult to achieve. So I think they've done the bare minimum to not have a complete mutiny in those slightly more post-material blue ribbon seats, but they haven't done enough to do enough for Australia's contribution to fixing the problem. And I think people are aware of that. The next question is from Don Morris, who asks, is there a chance the federal ICAC will become a campaign issue? Integrity, is that going to be a strong issue in the campaign, do you think? Yeah. So I don't think that undecided swinging voters necessarily can rattle off all the features that an ICAC must have or their preferred model of ICAC. But in terms of the view that politicians are in it for themselves and what have they got to hide, if one side of politics is prepared to offer a more robust watchdog, I do think that that is something that can win votes and definitely in the more post-material blue ribbon seats where the independents have made it a core part of their campaigns. Pete, anything to add to that on integrity? I think that the teal independents have marked it. I think that if there were a hung parliament and that was one of their requirements, I suspect that you would have the Prime Minister endorsing it before you could say minority government. The next question that I've got is from Liz Ryan and it's back on climate change again. This might be one for you, Paul. Why aren't people talking about the government just giving away our carbon credits to private profiteers? And will the media help the public learn about the significance of that both environmentally and politically? Just quickly, I think Liz there is referring to Angus Taylor releasing a bunch of people from their contracts and dropping the price of Australia's carbon credits. Paul, the net part of the net zero by 2050, is there anything you can tell us on that front? Well, I think there were a lot of compromises that the government had to make to get at net zero by 2050 across the line and it would be unfortunate if those actually make it more difficult to achieve a real reduction. You wouldn't want to trade window dressing of having the right target with policies that make it more difficult. And certainly a big issue for the Nationals because of how much agriculture is involved in that game of carbon credits, but also because it's much more difficult for say the agricultural sector than the electricity sector to decarbonise. So I think watch this space. I think there's going to be a lot more interesting stuff come out about carbon credits and offsets and the decisions that we have to make there in the long term. Just any final thoughts, I guess, before we go, Paul, as we head to the budget, what should people be looking out for? I think they should be thinking about not just what impacts their own household, but thinking about the vision for the country that the budget lays out generally and whether it's just a transactional thing trying to buy your vote or whether you actually think that the systems are going to be improved by what's offered in the budget. Thank you. And Pete, certainly we saw Peter Melanauskas on the weekend talking about a big government and having a future for the vision of his state and trying to head towards that more visionary end of things. Any lessons there? Well, someone that wants to run a government that believes in governing. Wow. And it hasn't been the modus operandi of the last 40 or 50 years. I think Paul's right. The budget is a test of what the government believes. And it's also his last shot in the locker, really. He needs to reload pretty quickly. So, you know, and I think one of the things is there'll be a lot of noise amplified by the government's friends in the media. And the question is going to be whether that takes fire or if it's just, you know, a lot of noise and then we're off to warn his funeral. Thanks all for listening. That was a recording of our live show, Pole Position hosted by the Australia Institute. You can take a look at the slides on the Essential Media website and find links on The Guardian if you want to watch it live. This episode was produced by Carla Anal and Karishma Luthria. Murph will be back next week.