 Just a heads up for our listeners, the following conversation contains themes surrounding mental health issues and suicide. There are many, many, many, many instances, I have to stress that, of unfortunately those who die by suicide who have not come into contact with the health or mental health system. This is Christine Morgan. Scott Morrison has recently appointed her to be his suicide prevention advisor. So suicide, when you go around the country, I have not met one person, and I'm not exaggerating this, I've not met one person who has not known of somebody or had it relatively close to their family. It just depends on how closely it has affected them. So it's a very key issue. Morgan is also the Chief Executive of the National Mental Health Commission. Now sadly suicide is the leading cause of death for young Australians, accounting for over one third of deaths amongst our younger people. Also suicide amongst Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples is around twice that of non-Indigenous Australians. In this episode of Australian Politics Live, I'm going to talk to Christine about her findings travelling through communities, and we're going to ask some big questions, including whether or not we have to start all over again with mental health. Christine, thank you very much for coming on the show. Thank you for your interest. Now I just want to start with a really easy question. Sure. She says, laughing. Why is there so much depression around? Why have we got a problem with suicide? Because it seems to me that I read an awful lot about this epidemics of mental health, illness, everything else. What I don't understand is why. So look, I think if I take a very general approach to that, and then I'll come back more to the specific. So if you stop and think about it, Catherine, actually as human beings, we're made up of our physical health and our mental health. But we're not used to thinking about ourselves in that way. We just take it as normal that at times we're going to be physically not as healthy as we could be. We might be physically unwell. We might actually be physically sick, and we do something about it. We don't make that assumption about our mental health, but actually each and every one of us has an integral part of our humanity and mental health. So I think one of the things that is happening, and this is a good thing, is that the level of awareness about the fact that each and every one of us has mental health and we need to look after it. We need to be mentally healthy and well, but we can also be unwell. It's becoming more talked about. I'm not going to say it's reduced in terms of stigma. That's a completely separate issue. But in terms of awareness about it, particularly amongst our young people, I think we are aware that we can have this. And so you will, if you look at rates of depression, let's look probably back now about 30, 40 years ago when we started through Beyond Blue and others to talk about the fact that this is not uncommon, makes people aware of, oh, maybe there is something wrong. So if in an absence of actually understanding about mental health, we may not even pick it up about ourselves. Mental health is not physical health. It's a lump or a bump. Mental health is about how we feel, about how we think about our behaviors. So do you think in part this is not minimizing what's happening in the community at the moment, which is obviously massively significant. But do you think it's, as you say, it's been this period of consciousness raising, awareness raising. So people are now presenting more often than they used to. Well, self-diagnosing is not quite what I mean. But they're aware that there may be a clinical dimension to how they're feeling rather than just being transiently sad or whatever else. And they're presenting, they're looking for help more often than they used to. I think that's a really good way to put it. And we don't clinically diagnose ourselves if we need to go to the GP. We might do a bit of a Google search. Google search, Dr. Google. But we do actually go and get it confirmed. I think that's right. But I think the other interesting thing here is that we are identifying a risk of something in ourselves to the extent we're familiar with that. Now, what I mean by that is depression is now a very common concept. We all know about it. We all talk about it. Anxiety is very common. But actually we use two words, mental health, to describe a broad range of what it is to be mentally unhealthy, unwell, having psychotic incidents, et cetera. And I fear that we still have a long way to go to properly unpack that whole concept of mental health and fully attribute different illnesses, different concepts of unwellness. Think of our physical health. We talk about having a cold or the flu or pneumonia or cancer or breast cancer. We don't talk physical health. We talk the specific. So in mental health, I long for the day when we can actually fully articulate all those different attributes of our mental unwellness and therefore be alert to it. So you're absolutely right. We're alert to depression. We're alert to anxiety because we know about them. But we're probably not that familiar with psychosis or with one of the specific disorders such as a needing disorder. It's only when something happens and is pretty bad that we go and research it and find out. And the Prime Minister, you run the National Mental Health Commission. The Prime Minister has appointed you to basically address high levels of suicide in the Australian community. Now, that appointment now is probably a month or a month. It is about two months old now. Yes. So you've been in the role not very long, but I know you've been on the road gathering information and trying to point yourself in the direction of how you'll handle this, this bit. You'll handle this particular commission from the Prime Minister. So what have you learned? Yes. So it is interesting. And it's actually interesting because my day job, as I say, is the CEO of the National Mental Health Commission. So I'm touring the countryside doing community consultations around what is the 2030 vision for what a mental health and suicide prevention system that works actually looks like. So along comes this fantastic opportunity. And I've got to say it's a real privilege to be appointed by the pre-em to be national suicide prevention adviser to him. And you can't kind of separate the two. I think we need to be very careful that suicide is not one and the same thing as mental health. It is much broader. But go into the community, talk mental health, and you talk suicide. That's the reality. So what am I finding as I go around those communities? I'm finding that there are relatively high levels of awareness, as I've just said. There is certainly incidents of suicide much more broadly than I think we have through our official data systems. That doesn't really surprise anybody who works in this area because we know our data collection is not the best it can be. So you mean that there could be more suicides than are being picked up in the data or less? Or what do you mean? So two things. Let's look at I think there are suicide attempts and there are suicides. Now, by definition, you can only report on those things when you have become aware of them or when they've hit the system. So you might have a suicide attempt that may not hit the health system. And if it doesn't, it doesn't get reported. There's a whole debate around whether somebody who self-harms is engaging in anything which could be akin to a suicide attempt. I don't want to presume you don't know what's inside somebody's mind. There are many, many, many, many instances I have to stress that of unfortunately those who die by suicide who have not come into contact with health or mental health system. So suicide, when you go around the country, I have not met one person and I'm not exaggerating this. I've not met one person who has not known of somebody or had it relatively close to their family. It just depends on how closely has it affected them. So it's a very key issue. One of the sad, sad things, though, that I've found as I've gone around the countryside, high levels of awareness, high levels of yes, I know somebody who has been affected by this or I have been affected by it. But the levels of stigma against mental health and suicide-ation are so alive and well. And that's a real issue I think we need to face in Australia. You mean from the point of view of employers, family members? Yes. Where's the stigma coming from? Well, the stigma is a very self-identified thing. It is, I understand that somebody might have a mental health issue and I don't blame them for that. I don't think there are less of them for that. But oh, if it means I've got to disclose it about myself, what will somebody think about me? How will that impact on my job? How will it impact on my life insurance? How will it impact? One very sad one I heard going around the country was looking, say, at issues like domestic violence and a woman's refuge. And if a woman is in a woman's refuge and has identified as somebody with mental health challenges, what is the likelihood that that will be brought up in any custody battles around the kids? They're very real instances as we go around the country of we are good at, quite good at understanding about mental health, much better than we were, but at so many systemic levels, we need to answer questions. So you do a visa application and on most visa applications, you need to answer questions about whether you've had any mental health issues. And people are reluctant to do that. And people are reluctant to do that. I think in some of your early interviews, you were separating the job with suicide prevention from the mental health system and you were signaling that you were looking for ways of, well, I don't know, earlier intervention or something outside the scope of the system. I want to talk to you about the system. Sure. But it's an interesting signal you've seen. It's a strong one. So what do you mean? Where's your head? And I think this is very much where the Prime Minister is coming from. So I think it's fair to say that traditionally approaches towards suicide and suicide prevention have come from health and from mental health. And the good, strong, very well-researched programs, activities right across the spectrum of prevention, intervention and postvention. What we're looking at doing here, though, is to say, OK, those treatments really look at what we call the proximal factors. So somebody has been identified as being highly at risk. But we know that for anybody who is at that point of suicide ideation, that they have reached a point of despair. They've reached a point where they're giving up hope. So there is good evidence to say that you need to broaden the ambit of what you're looking at if you're looking at what are the pathways to somebody getting there. And that's really what I'm keen and interested to do and what the Prime Minister is so interested in. In conversations I've had with him, he has said, look, what are those things we call them? It's a phrase called the social determinants. What are those things which really can impact on any of us, which could lead us to that point where we feel such a sense of despair, loss of hope? And for those who've got to look at things like employment, long term unemployment and what that may mean for somebody, you need to look at your housing security. As you go out to Australia, you need to look at food security. Believe it or not, still in 2019, we have food security issues in this country. You need to look at justice, as in the justice system where you've come into it. Absolutely, you need to look at trauma across the spectrum. Where somebody has experienced trauma in their life, there is very clear areas of risk. That could manifest themselves. And so you're really saying, I mean, you've said it explicitly a minute ago, it's looking at a cohort of people who are sitting outside the mental health system as well as the people inside it. There'll be a number of people inside the mental health system who are depressed with suicidal ideations, right, that are in the system so-called. But then you're looking at a bunch of people also who have not been presenting as having long term mental health problems that are basically undiagnosed if they're having mental health problems. So you're sort of coming at a set of characteristics that allow you to identify those people, people at risk earlier. Is that what you mean? I think it is. And I think I would even move away from thinking we're trying to identify a cohort of people. And that's an interesting concept to explore because the way I would look at phrasing it is to say, I'm actually looking at what are those distal factors that could affect any Australian. So without wanting to make a presumption or an assumption about any Australian and where they're coming from, what are those things which actually, you know, what if, but for the grace of God, any of us went through them. They could be cumulative on somebody and take them to that point where they feel as though they've lost all sense of hope. And those are the factors we're really looking at identifying. So and then we're looking at saying, OK, once we look at those social determinants, let's use that phrase, it's easy, then how can we at a, call it a cross portfolio level, how can we actually go into areas that are not health related and say, OK, what can we do in that space to actually be alert? And I've used the phrase before, others have used the phrase that actually at the end of the day, suicide, mental health, in fact, but suicide is every Australian's business. Because what I have found on the ground is amongst communities of any size, any shape, wherever they are in Australia, they say, we know our people. Some communities acknowledge the fact that in 2019, we're not quite as good at doing communities as perhaps we have been in the past. Social media is a big impact, all those kind of things. But when we stop and have the conversation about who would be best placed to identify those who may be approaching that point in the local community without a shadow of a doubt, they say, we know our people. And when you think about it, if somebody's not presenting into the health or mental health system, what you're really looking for is sort of subtle changes. And to pick up subtle changes, you need to know that person. So one of the things we actually need to do is not only identify what are some of those other causal factors. So when those causal factors hit, we think, let's go into it. When a drought hits, let's be careful. If you have children who are out of home care, let's be careful. If somebody has gone through a traumatic event in the community, let's be careful. Let's look at those factors. Let's go. Okay. Flag's going. But then also, how do we equip average Australians to be able to have the confidence to say, let's kind of have a conversation. How are you feeling? And then to go that step further, if they say, I'm not actually feeling great, to do those basics of where do we go and how do we do it so that we don't ignore it. Yes, that's interesting. Let me think, though, for a bit about the mental health system. Sure. Because I mean, there are so many issues with the mental health system that will make this task more complex for you. That's right. Yeah. You know, we can sort of range from, you know, you could you could pick any checklist, you could you could sort of identify that there's probably more health and helping the mental health system for adolescents than there are for adults. Yep. I think that's a fair call. Yes. There's the fact that the system basically responds to people who present with a clinical episode that responds quite quickly and forcefully to people who presented emergency having tried to kill themselves or harmed themselves in some way. But if you're just drifting around in the mental health system, not feeling great, you come up on suicide metrics, but you haven't done anything, then people really don't know what to do with you. There's no touch point. There's no touch point at that point. That's exactly the problem. Christine, tell me how on earth do you untangle this system? Do you think we have to start again? Look, that's a very live question. One, I'm asking myself, as I work through this project to the the Federal Health Minister on this one of what does it look like if we get it right, then I stop and I realize our mental health system has effectively been inverted commas birthed out of our general health system. Our general health system is medicalised models. We are in our general health system when we are unwell, we have an illness, we want it identified, we use tests to identify it, we want it treated, we want to have another test to measure if that's worked. We don't really care about whether somebody's got a great bedside manner, it'd be nice. You know what, just fix me and can I have the best that I can access? But when you look at mental health, mental health, as I said earlier, is about our thoughts, our feelings, our behaviours. To even to be able to communicate that to somebody, you need to have a language and often the more unwell you are becoming, the more difficult it is to find the language to communicate that. You need to have a touch point with somebody who can identify that there's an issue. And you're not really, in most instances, looking for a clinical diagnosis. There might be some component of that. But actually, we reach that point in our mental unwellness through our life journeys. So you need to be very engaged in that. And then you need, in order to really come out through into a position of recovery, very rarely is it just medication, it doesn't. You do need self engagement, you need to harness it. So your question was, do we need to change the system? Do we need to rebirth it? I kind of hope we don't have to go right back to that point. But I certainly do think we need to broaden the scope of what the system is. So the entry point is not when you have a clinical medicalised illness. We need to broaden it. We need to be able to take a multidisciplinary approach. And a truly multidisciplinary in the physical health system, we have a GP who refers to a specialist. In mental health, you need to have many disciplines involved at the same time, working collaboratively. You need to engage the person and their family in whatever concept that may be, because we don't exist as individuals, we have others. And you need a much more work with me, not work on me approach. Now, quite how much change we need to do in terms of policy changes, in terms of service redesign, in terms of underpinning funding changes, that's an issue we're really grappling with at the moment. But I do fundamentally believe we need to take a different approach to mental health, to what we do with clinical health. And then, then we're going to have to really do the hard yards because mental health and physical health happen within our same Earth suit. So somehow, we've got to bring it back together. Exactly. Because there are difficulties, aren't there? One of the problems that people identify in the system, as well as the few others I just gave you in a shopping list before, is often GPs, for example, if there is a drug component to the illness, to anxiety or depression or psychosis or whatever. Often, the GPs are very reluctant to adjust the medication, change you from one thing to another, because they don't feel they have sufficient expertise. So then you get in this feedback loop where you go to the GP, say, I think my anti-anxiety meds aren't working as well as they used to, or my depression meds or whatever. And the GP says, gosh, you'll have to go to a psychiatrist for that, go on a waiting list for a psychiatrist in a lot of places. Then it can be months before you actually get intervention, thinking again back to your suicide, putting your suicide hat on. The system elevates the risk factors. It certainly runs the risk of that, because take that example you're giving where I don't feel my meds are working, and you're right, in most instances the GP will say, well, let's get you back to your psych, and you've got a long waiting list to do it. But also to deal with your mental health issues, you need that psychotherapeutic approach. You need that alongside the medications. Well, this is the other thing. For a lot of illnesses, I think Medicare subsidy for a treatment by a psychologist varies by condition, in terms of how much you can have a Medicare subsidized trip to the psychologist. If you've got a really acute ongoing mental illness, you know, 10 sessions, I'm just pulling that number out of the air, right? 10 sessions a year is not going to do it. But then again, it gets even more complicated than that, because when you look at, say, Medicare for a physical health issue, let's say we've got how many dosages of treatment do you need? Let's take it away from Medicare. Let's look at cancer. You know, you will have your dosages of chemotherapy or radiation therapy or whatever, and then you measure it to see how it's going. So when it comes to mental health, there's a whole basket of different modalities of psychotherapeutic approaches, which need to be looked at. And one size does not fit all. Then you also need to look at, as you nuance it down further, do if there is a specific disorder that's presenting such as an eating disorder, then what are the evidence based modalities of treatment for that specific disorder? What are the evidence based dosages of treatment? And most importantly, how do we measure along the way to see whether that treatment is being effective or not? And again, we take the risk when it comes to, and I say this with very much respect to my colleagues in the therapeutic field, but we do in common parlance talk about, I go to a psychologist to get treatment. But that's a bit like saying, I go to a doctor to get treated for cancer. No, you don't. You've got to really nuance the treatment down to the issues you're dealing with. And then we need a system that can say, OK, how do we even reimburse that? What do we do about it? So we have such a long way to go in being able to unpick that and really get it aligned properly. But we're on the path. At least we're on the path with it. And at least we're now able to say we can start to understand some of those complexities. And what about to there's been quite a lot of attention in the news over the past couple of weeks in particular about kids or a particular group of kids who are at very high risk of mental illness and that's trans kids. The Australian was wrapped over the knuckles by Media Watch earlier in this week because they've established a new gender page and a lot of the coverage has been negative for trans people to be negative coverage. Now, how helpful is that? I mean, it's not only we're not only talking about a system that needs, you know, you're being incredibly polite and measured and nuanced, but needs a bomb under it basically, right? But you've got external factors like media coverage that impacts on the well-being of people. So are you concerned about that? The answer is yes. I think we need to be. We need to be concerned about what are those factors which influence people. And I think one of the defining attributes of the 21st century and the time we are living in now is the impact of social media. Now, I've always said to that I don't hold to the fact that media necessarily owns shaping the conversation. I think the media is a conduit of what people find interesting to talk about and we've all become, I dare to say, chair experts at nearly everything because we can all have an immediate opinion and impact. But I think the challenge we face is what is the impact of that on somebody and that impacts on them very rarely. Is it kind of like it doesn't physically hit them? It mentally hits them. So I think it is a very significant factor of what are those conversations that are happening in the media and what are the vulnerabilities of people in terms of hearing those things. Now, we probably can't turn that tap off, but on that space, I often think we need to look at how can we help particularly our young people, but across all ages, to develop old-fashioned media literacy skills that are applied in the social media space so that they can become a little bit more inquiring, a little bit more resilient, a little bit more, do I really need to buy into this? Because I don't think we're going to turn the social media off. I think we need to self-regulate it better, but I think that's a whole piece of work. And I think that goes towards if I look down the mental health lens or the suicide prevention lens, then I love the concept of embracing, and many in Australia say they want this rather than concentrating on mental health, being mentally well, emotional well-being, emotional social well-being, mentally healthy. And a component of being mentally healthy, I think, is being able to have that self-resilience. Absolutely. And I totally agree with you about social. Absolutely. And it's very, you know, it's like an open channel that can't be regulated. But in terms of mainstream media coverage, sort of going back to that example of being much more right, it's sort of, I fear, elements of this debate are kind of getting ensnared in culture war nonsense. That is, and that is, well. So I actually think, let me see if I can look at it from this perspective, because interesting question you raise. If we go back to that essential premise I started with, that we all have our mental health as well as our physical health, maybe the kind of the bedrock of what we're now talking about is the fact that every time you talk about an issue, if it's got a touch point with you, then it's going to probably have an impact. And if it has an impact on you, it's going to impact on you subjectively. And when you get into the subjective space, you're dealing with your mental health. So I think we all as human beings have vulnerability to different conversations, different ways things are presented. And maybe what we are now is a bit more aware of the fact we can be vulnerable to that and it can have an impact on us. But do you think that media publishers should bear that in mind? I think they always have to bear it in mind. It's always a challenge, isn't it, as to where you have free and open debate and how you do it. And I think what it comes down to, Kaspern, that I have looked at in working in mental health and media over the last 15 years is it's not so much the subject matter content, which is ever the issue. It is the matter in which it's communicated. So I think we can own content, but it's about respectful dialogue and respectful presentation of it. That I think is the fundamental we need to grapple with. Yeah, absolutely. And look, it's pretty clear from our conversation that I really could trap you in the studio and talk to you about for about three hours about this stuff because I'm just I am absolutely fascinated and so hopeful that your process will result in a change that the system needs. So what is what's your deal with Scott Morrison? Right. What does he said to you? As he said, you've got to bring me a bunch of recommendations in six months. So what is what is the understanding between the prime minister and you about what you do? So I think let's deal with the sort of the roadmap, if you like, first. So the roadmap is to say, Christine, can we go further upstream? I, as first minister, have the capacity to actually have touch points across many portfolios. So there's an absolute rationale for myself as first minister to be saying, let's look upstream, because if you just give this to the health ministers, they can talk to their colleagues, but they don't have the same leverage power. So firstly, can we look upstream and look at some of those what's regarded as the distal factors, the social determinants and what are some initiatives that we can start to look at that might unlock some further preventive activity that we can take further early intervention. So what are those initiatives? Secondly, what is there? So the first the first deliverable, I guess, is to say, by November, are there any what I would call low hanging fruit as to how we can coordinate things better, that we can do things better to kind of accelerate this along. So what we're doing on that, we're doing a bit of a forensic analysis at the moment of all of the things that are going on. And there are some really good things going on right across that spectrum of prevention, intervention and postvention. So what could we do in those spaces? Is there anything which is highlighted as an exemplar that we think could be picked up out of one state and moved across the other? Because, of course, we have the challenge on this that we have a federated model of health care, which means that it's not just what the Commonwealth doing, but what each of the states are doing. So is there any exemplars that we can pick up? Is there any better way of coordinating things? Is there anything which is obviously that we shouldn't stop or those kind of things then going into next year? It's saying without trying to take our foot off the pedal of any of those current intervention strategies that are happening, how can we take what the people who are currently working in this space are doing, come in, if you like, almost with a pincer movement from those upstream social determinants and say, is there some initiatives we can do that, intervene in that space? Point one. Point two, should we be engaging communities? I think the answer is going to be pretty obviously yes. If so, how can we do that in a more effective way? Are there some things that we can do? And then thirdly, what sort of long term lens do we need to take on it? One of the issues that I think I would flag at this point is that we have had many programs that have been invested in many trials, many things that have started that have done good things and then have been stopped. One of the lens that I'm particularly interested in looking through is the policy lens. What do we perhaps need to consider at a policy level which will embed some of these changes as distinct from being further programs which are activity based? No, hooray. Do you think, we'll end on this, do you think the, I mean it's a dreadful question for me to ask and terribly unfair because you're not going to say no, but do you think the Prime Minister gets it? I'm actually going to answer this with genuine sincerity. I have sat beside him in the car and talked about this and said, what are you really wanting here? I have seen the sincerity with which he has said to me, I need to understand why so many Australians are feeling such a sense of despair and a loss of hope that this seems to them to be the way to go. I don't want that as Prime Minister. Good night to end on, I think, Christine. Thanks for your time. Thank you. Well, thank you so much for listening. We really do appreciate it. Production this week is by Hannah Isard and Miles Martin Yurney. You know the drill, subscribe, share, tell your friends, all of that sort of jazz and we'll be back again with you next week. Also be clear, Australian listeners can contact Lifeline on 13 1114 or visit lifeline.org.au if this podcast episode raises any issues.