 This is The Guardian. It seems to me that it's almost polar opposite this time around where the problem is not that wages are spiraling, but wages aren't moving and that people have lost trust in that particularly off the back of the global pandemic. I think that people are looking at this summit not as a bit of incremental machinery, but more what is going to come out that's actually going to shift the game and maybe give more power back to individuals on the way the system works. Hello and welcome to the Australian Politics Podcast. I'm Sarah Martin, Chief Political Correspondent for Guardian Australia, filling in for Murph while she's on leave writing the next quarterly essay. And I'm here today to analyse the latest Guardian Essential poll data. I'm joined by Peter Lewis, Executive Director at Essential Media, to guide us through the numbers. This week we discuss a wide range of topics from the secret portfolios Scott Morrison held while he was Prime Minister and Electric Vehicles to Labor's Job Summit next week and whether it could lead to any major industrial reforms. This talk was recorded on Tuesday and it comes from a webinar hosted by the progressive think tank the Australia Institute. If you would like to follow along and have a look at the slides discussed during the episode you can find them on the Essential Media website. This conversation was moderated by Ebony Bennett, the Deputy Director of the Australia Institute. I'll hand over to Ebony now who starts by asking me about what's been going on in the last fortnight. Sarah, first to you, I know you've just come from the Prime Minister's press conference. Tell us about the last couple of weeks in politics. Well, I don't know if we can remember two weeks ago because the past week has just been so overwhelmingly dominated by the Scott Morrison secret ministry scandals and sort of like the cold dead hand of the Morrison government reaching out from the grave and just for one final grand hurrah. So it has been a pretty extraordinary week. Obviously the revelations were sort of first sort of mildly reported in the Australian government just over a week ago from a book called Plague, which was sort of slightly a bit of a hagiography of Scott Morrison's handling of the pandemic. And in that we learnt that he'd taken over the health and finance portfolios. And then it was quickly revealed that he had also taken over industry and resources. And then after Anthony Albanese launched an investigation, we learnt that he'd also taken on Treasury and Home Affairs. So for those who haven't noticed this particular scandal unfolding, that's sort of the short version, but obviously there's lots and lots of questions still to be answered. There's interesting advice from the Solicitor General today, basically confirming that while the decision was legally valid, it fundamentally undermined responsible government, which I think we all sort of felt in our bones and obviously had been the reason there had been so much uproar about this move. So it has been a big week. It has been a big week. Yeah, there's lots to get into. Pete, I wonder if we can get stuck in to the results here from today's Guardian Essential poll. And apologies, we almost did a recall of our poll so that we could find out what people thought about the former Prime Minister, but we're already in the field. What we did have was kind of a different approach to testing leadership. So normally we ask around whether people approve or disapprove of the job individuals are doing as you know, Prime Minister or Opposition Leader. What we thought would be also interesting is just to get a general level of favourability. So this is not connected to doing their job. This is just sort of trying to get a sense of the vibe of some of our leaders and we've put a few of them in the field and it's interesting. So we're asking people to rate from zero to 10 how they feel about our elected leaders and these are the results. We've clustered them in kind of positive in the seven to 10 neutral four to six and negative zero to three. And you can see here that our Prime Minister when he's not knocking back beers at gangs of youths is seen as a net positive. 43% are sort of in that seven to 10 range, another 28% in the mid range, just a quarter of people not really warming. You can kind of see some differences there. If you're listening to on the pod and you can't see the screen, Peter Dutton, as opposed to Anthony Albanese and that seven to 10 just has 26% of people that warm to the Dutton vibe. 34% in the zero to three there. We also tested that favourability with some of the other leaders of minor groups. So David Littleproud, who is he you may ask, is someone that has got a little bit of 21 positive in that high positive 27 negative, but then far more never heard of 20% or up with no real understanding of who the fellow is. We also checked out in band Jackie Lambie and Pauline Hanson just to have a sort of a fabric of favourability around the place. It's interesting, the the green leader and the one nation leader are much more polarizing. So the number of rating in the real negative territory for Bant, it's 37. For Hanson, it's 48 as opposed to low 20s in the high range. And then you've got Jackie Lambie, who is we've always said she's a balanced character, but there there's real balance. 27 high, 27 low, 33 in the middle, and then a few that have never heard of her aren't sure. So it tells us that the mainstream leaders actually have a stronger base that the leaders of parties on the edges by nature, more polarizing, hardly surprising. But a nice little I think I think the interest is there. If we go back to that every quarter, we'll start building a bit of a series and seeing if those ratings move over time. So after that, we started preparing ourselves for the upcoming jobs and skills summit and trying to get a sense of what the electorate is expecting and wanting from our leaders. And we threw a couple of propositions, which we force people to make a choice on just to see where the dial lands. The first of these questions is giving people a choice between the proposition that Australia's economic system is broken and the government needs to make fundamental changes to sort it out. And the proposition Australia's economic system is basically sound and the government surely make minor adjustments to make it better. 5842 see the system as broken. And if you go to the next slide, what's really interesting to me is that this is not a partisan issue. 54% of Liberal voters see the system as fundamentally broken. 59% of Labor voters, 62% of Greens, 66 of those that vote for minor parties are independents. And it got me thinking about the summit and I guess reflecting on this idea that we're rerunning the 1983 jobs summit that Bob Hawke held in the early days of his government, which was really the precursor to the opening up of the economy underpinned by the wages and income accord. And while a lot of people are saying this is kind of a rerun of that, it strikes me as actually the opposite. 1983 was about getting the social license to basically open the economy up and integrate with the global economy underpinned by a social safety net that meant that the impacts weren't as strong or as hard, I guess, as Reagan and Thatcher, but still part of that global integration. It seems to me that it's almost a polar opposite this time around where the problem is not that wages are spiraling, but wages aren't moving and that global system, people have lost trust in that, particularly off the back of the global pandemic. So what does all that mean? I think that people are looking at this summit, not as a bit of incremental machinery, but more what is going to come out that's actually going to shift the game and maybe give more power back to individuals on the way the system works. Yeah, and Sarah, if I can just bring you in on this next one, we've got here 80% of respondents said government should have an active role in shaping the economy and just 20% governments should stay out and leave it up to the market. It strikes me that that is completely the opposite of how basically most economists and business leaders have talked about the economy for the last 20 years at least. There's been a real shift in attitudes there, hasn't there? Yeah, look, I thought this was possibly the most fascinating response in the poll. And I couldn't help but wonder whether the pandemic and obviously the government's role managing the pandemic had really shaped and perhaps changed people's opinions on that. And I guess we've also seen repeated instances of market failure and people are now starting to feel that in their lives and their everyday cost of living concerns. So in some ways it's surprising, but in other ways it makes perfect sense. So obviously that leaves the free market years very much on the fringe with most people wanting to see the government take an active role in shaping the economy. And that's obviously goes well for Anthony Albanese and Jim Chalmers as they're sort of developing a reform agenda. They've made no secret of the fact that they do want to be reformists. I think we could probably all call our jets a bit about the likelihood of that happening in this term of government. I think the game plan is really to use this term to sort of bed down some ideas, you know, nothing radical in their first term that they definitely want to win a second term. But then obviously keep a close eye on the reform agenda that they take to the next election. So and obviously the Jobs and Skills Summit is a huge part of sort of, you know, developing that platform. Yeah. And again, just to Sarah's point, I reckon for the last 30 years, reform has almost been, it has meant government moving out. Like reform has been deregulation, it's been smaller government. I think the whole nature of reform is shifting. And so if a reform agenda is to come up with a more ambitious role for government, that is that 180 degrees shift. And as you can see on this, it's across all parties again. Just to make that choice, coalition voters are 7723 up for government. I just find that amazing. 77. More than three quarters of coalition voters think government should take an active role in shaping the economy. So the question though is, if there is that much enthusiasm for these propositions, where does the resistance come? And I think that will be interesting to see how the debates around the Jobs Summit play out. There's been a bunch of ideas rolled out, some quite radical, but I know Sarah led with the price caps, but 69% support price caps on essential services like energy. 61% placing taxes on companies that make additional profits due to rising inflation. This is government intervention, setting paying conditions across the industries rather than individual workplaces. It's over 50%. And the negatives on these are under 10%. There's minuscule opposition to these propositions. So they're not even, it's not even like we've got a 30, 30, 30, which is those policy debates where you've got two sides and undecided in the middle. It's one sided. The lowest one and the only one that we've really flagged is going to happen is the increasing skilled migration, which 47 and 18 oppose. But that is the only one of those elements that you would say are part of a neoliberal agenda. And the rest of it is that idea of reform the way they used to do it before the 1983 summit. And if we can just come to the last one here, attitudes to groups views of the economy. Why did you ask about this one, Pete? I was just interested in who'd have a credible voice at the summit. I'm interested how strong small business has seen as being to act in the best interest. So we asked to what extent do you agree or disagree that following groups views of the Australian economy align with your best interests. So 56% say small business, 51% say community organisations, which I guess we meant civil society. 36% unions, that's interesting. That's about double the current rate of unions in the country with another 35% neither support nor oppose. They have a seat at the table and the lowest is big business, but no one ever likes big business. Right. But where you can see the attacks against any sort of government intervention agenda coming is from that group that's got the least amount of social capital big business, I would imagine. Yeah. I want to come back now to you, Sarah. Obviously, there's a lot to unpack in all of that. And the government, I think, has been really making an effort to kind of manage expectations about what's going to come out around the job summit. I think the prime minister was pointing out, you know, you don't solve a massive skills or jobs crisis, you know, after one day or two days of a summit. But there is a huge expectation here that people are happy for the government to intervene. They're wanting to see reforms and to make the economy work better. How well is that expectation management going, do you think? And is it shaping up to be a good summit for the Albanese government? Well, the prime minister has already made the point that he thinks it's a good summit before it's even begun, because obviously, people are talking about this and it's really focused the minds of the community and businesses and industry and unions. Look, I think he sort of talked down the prospect of another grand accord, you know, sort of suggested that it's not a hawk redux. That was this situation at the time and decisions were made that suited the economic times in the 80s. So he sort of, I guess, put a bit of cold water on the idea that there's going to be some grand bargain that comes out of this summit. I mean, we know that obviously the refrain we're hearing from every single industry group at the moment is that workforce challenges are a huge issue. So there is going to be something on skilled migration. I think there's no doubt about that. And the government has made it pretty clear that they're looking at increasing the intake over the next few years. We sort of have a situation where numbers haven't returned to pre-pandemic levels, but there's also, you know, obviously, limits to that and what that can actually solve. And of course, there are concerns about how that might play into wage growth. So there's going to be a lot of views aired. There's only 100 people attending the summit. And obviously, that guest list has been kept pretty tight for a reason. I think, you know, there's also the possibility that there could be a bit of a breakaway accord sort of between the BCA and the ACTU, which is obviously there's mixed views about whether or not that would be a good thing or not. You can expect to hear discussion about industry level bargaining. And then, of course, many of the things that the poll asked about. So it's a big agenda in terms of outcomes that you're right. The prime minister has said, you know, we're not going to fix it after two days of of summiting, but certainly it gives them a good base from which to build, you know, some policy decisions that they'll take. And I expect we'll be sort of finalised and announced in the October budget. And hey, I mean, whatever comes out of this, as the polling shows, there's just it seems like an enormous appetite and support from the public to back some interventions here to make things work better. There is an appetite for ambition that I'm picking up in these numbers. I'm not quite old enough to remember the 83 summit. I was still in high school, but maybe some of the people that are joining us in chat would have been closer to it at the time. But I think the other thing looking back at that that I find interesting is that it wasn't that all the big decisions on opening the economy were made in that two day summit, but the sense of that partnership between the different parts of the economy was forged at the summit and that enabled the broader reform program that rolled out through the 80s and into the 90s and delivered the social wage and also stabilised the economy. So of course, you can't summit your way to an economic reform agenda in two days. And there are serious self-imposed guardrails the government placed on themselves in order to get into power as well. So there are a number of design constraints, but I do think that if we remember the one promise that the Prime Minister did made was to make the economy work for people. And I think even if we got to the point where the summit was looking at the economic challenges through the eyes of workers rather than through the broader system, it will be a really important step forward. And then of course, you've got workers in key areas. You've got the caring economy workforce. You've got the disability workforce, indigenous workforce. But if you look at those as people rather than as widgets in a system, I think it will open the way for a really important reform agenda over hopefully not just one term, but a number of terms of labour government. Yeah, but Sarah, coming back to you, I do think that role of summits like the job summit, like the revenue summit in the lead up to the budget, really just opening up this economic debate, which for so long, I feel like has excluded the public to a certain extent, really focusing quite narrowly on whatever the business council of Australia thought was valuable. Now we've got kind of unions coming to the table. Civil society feels like it's back in that conversation. It feels like we might get some different results here because there might be some more diverse people around the table. Does that seem like the approach to you that the government is kind of inviting more people into the conversation? Oh, absolutely. I think very much the message that we're getting from the New Albanese government is they are in a listening phase and that everyone is invited to put their views forward at this stage. And that's obviously very different to what we had under the Morrison government and the preceding coalition governments in that you're right, they had very sort of narrow interests in their ear. There were a lot of community groups who felt that they struggled to be heard. Obviously, the unions didn't struggle to get a look in as well. So I think there is a view that the government is hearing from everyone. Albanese has made it pretty clear he wants to be a consensus type of leader. I don't think he's going to suddenly turn around and piss off the BCA or the big employer groups. He's not that kind of leader, I don't think. So he will be looking for areas of consensus to come out of this. I think it's also fair to say that he's made it pretty clear that he's not intending to ruffle any furthers anytime soon. He's in a good position in the polls, as we know, when he's been asked about major reforms, things like super profit tax, things like whining about the stage three tax cuts. He's been very clear that he's not going to, he's not for turning on any of those big picture things at this point, whether or not that changes after the summit. I think it's pretty clear that he's sort of treading softly. I don't think we're going to get any sort of major dramatic reform, but I think we are going to at least have the government listening to a range of stakeholders. And I'm sorry to use that word. Yeah. Sarah, I want to come now to integrity, I guess, because of the five secret ministerial appointments, kind of a hot topic. The opposition is obviously trying to downplay the seriousness of it and kind of say this whole reaction is a bit overblown. But the finding that it has seriously undermined the principles of good governance is not a small finding. And I think it's very valid to look at this and be like, well, we have to prevent something like this from ever happening again. What are we expecting out of the solicitor general's advice today and then a potential investigation or committee through parliament looking into this a bit more? So what Anthony Albanese has said today is that in addition to the solicitor general's advice that he has received and now reviewed is that they're going to establish another inquiry which will really sort of thrash out some of those questions and also come to the question of what loopholes need to be closed and that will provide obviously parliament a basis on which to act to ensure that this can't happen again. And obviously this was not illegal. It was a constitutionally valid thing to do. It just was without precedent and obviously went against matters of convention. So it's obviously this is just one sort of step in the process. In terms of consequences for Morrison, that's obviously still the issue that we have and that there's no sort of clear pathway to sort of hold him to account for these decisions. Obviously there's the prospect of him being referred to the privileges committee. There's a prospect of him facing a censure motion in parliament. The problem with the privileges committee referral is that notifying parliament of the ministerial changes is again, it's a courtesy, it's a convention, it's not a requirement of the parliament. So, you know, there's sort of a lot of grey area here which clearly the government has flagged it wants to fix to ensure that this is not open to interpretation, is not subject to the whims of the government of the day, but is something that is not just sort of the constitutional convention, but something that is actually a legal requirement so that obviously this can't happen again. Yeah, because it does make you realise how much of the Westminster tradition relies on convention. It relies on people doing the right thing, essentially. And I think this has been really revealing in showing all it takes is one person, you know, acting in secret to upend the whole system of accountability. It's a bit alarming to say the least. Yeah, and there's obviously still questions about the Governor General's role in this. The people within the department who knew about this, who obviously, you know, that convention required them to have that information made public. So clearly people did know about this. It wasn't just Morrison, you know, in a room by himself signing the administrative order and making the decision not to publish it himself. There were other people involved. So I doubt we're going to see accountability from all the people involved, but certainly it's not going to go away anytime soon. There's still this inquiry to come and also obviously what action the parliament may take in terms of trying to at least reprimand Scott Morrison. Yeah, because this idea that it wasn't illegal, I find to be just appalling. You know, the idea that that's the bar that we have to clear is so low. It's not illegal. But I think also there's other integrity issues around the Australia Institute and the Grattan Institute more recently have done a lot of research into kind of grants with ministerial discretion being really skewed towards political outcomes instead of decided in the national interest. People can find that on australianstitute.org.au about grants with ministerial discretion. Lots of money going to coalition seats, not so much outside of that. Political appointments to the AAT and Sarah, obviously we've got expecting draft legislation for a federal ICAC to come in soon. But again, with this stuff and corruption in general, it's not necessarily illegal, is it? So it's not clear that this kind of stuff would end up with the federal ICAC that's supposed to be looking into kind of serious and systemic corruption. So like a lot of places for integrity to go and a lot of I suspect members of the parliament very interested in keeping these issues front and centre. Yeah, absolutely. And it's and it is those gray areas that you talk about, which is going to be very interesting to see how the bill that is being prepared by the Attorney General Mark Dreyfus will address some of that. I mean, they've obviously suggested that they want port barrelling to potentially be under its remit, but how they actually do that and still allow themselves to port barrelling when they want is going to be very intriguing to watch. Yeah, absolutely. I can see that we've got more than 660 people on the line with us. Thank you so much for joining us today. We're going to go pretty soon to questions from the audience. The first one that I've got here is from John Knox, and he says, as reported on ABCRN this morning, with 90% of our fuel supplies potentially impacted by issues in the South China Sea, would it be a good idea to seriously push the uptake of electric vehicles to provide energy security and stop pumping big dollars to the fossil fuel majors? Sarah, we have that big EV Summit just on Friday, and I believe an announcement on fuel efficiency standards there. Yes, that's right. So it is certainly on the government's agenda. We know, so basically what Chris Bowen announced last week is that they'll be releasing a discussion paper about the National Electric Vehicle Strategy and how that's going to work, and also obviously looking at the issue of fuel efficiency standards. So this is something that Australia has been lagging on for some time. We know that we've sort of been a dumping ground for cars that wouldn't meet the efficiency standards of other countries. So this is something that I think the government is playing a bit of catch up on. In terms of the point about how fuel security, that's also something that's on the government's agenda as well. But yes, certainly something that the government's determined to do something about after it's sort of been raised as a concern, but not much happening in that space for some time. Yeah, and fuel security is kind of one issue, but obviously we've got all those cost of living pressures with the price of petrol going up a lot. It seems to me like that's an issue that's got a lot of legs because it reaches out on a whole lot of different fronts for people. Yeah, and a whole lot of challenges for the government. The long term answer is clearly, as the questioner put it, energy self-sufficiency and cars running off a renewable grid. Terrific. In the meantime, you've got the fuel excise that's taking a little bit of heat out of the cost and that's due to be lifted in the next few months. You've got shortages, not just of gas, but other fuel sources as well. And we've basically got to the questions that we were asking earlier, an over-reliance on a global economy where the supply chains have become brittle, not just through the pandemic, but particularly through the pandemic and the geopolitical circumstances. And now we go, well, where's our interest being looked after in the 40 years of economic reform has made us interreliant on a world that's becoming increasingly unreliable. So a couple of questions here, Sarah, following up on the secret ministerial appointments, one asking about the governor general and has his role been compromised. Can you tell us what you know about that? Are there serious people kind of calling for his resignation or is there a view that the responsibility really lies with the former prime minister? No, I mean, I guess all the constitutional experts are saying that really sort of questions for the governor general here. He sort of followed what he was supposed to do. He signs off on these portfolio allocations routinely for things like when people go on leave or if there's a minister who has a conflict of interest, say, and another minister has to take over their portfolios, you know, even just particular legislation from within that portfolio. The office of the governor general has made it very clear that that decision was up to the government. Several days of these stories being reported. The office of the governor general issued a further statement saying they had no reason to doubt that the portfolio allocations would be made public because they assumed it was happening as a matter of course. Now, obviously, there's a sort of internal process that takes place with that, that involves the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. Scott Morrison wasn't going down to government house and sitting in a chair and putting his hand over a Bible and being sworn in in the traditional way. So I guess the issue is whether there was not a sort of lack of curiosity on the part of the governor general as to why this was happening in a way that certainly did not seem to meet with convention. We don't know yet whether he sought any further advice about that. I guess we accept the argument that in 2020 when those portfolios were first taken over, that perhaps at the time, obviously early in the pandemic, perhaps the governor general just thought it was a matter of routine and was going to be published in the normal course of events. But then obviously in 2021 when Morrison also took on Treasury and Home Affairs, I think that raises more questions about the process and why at that point the governor general didn't seek further legal advice about whether or not that should be made public or if he'd noticed that it hadn't been made public in previous instances, if he was just sort of signing these off and sending them back to the department, had he not noticed that they weren't made public, I mean that's sort of something we don't know the answer to at this point but maybe this further inquiry will get to the bottom of that. Yeah and just sticking with this issue for a minute, what about the lack of curiosity from the former deputy prime minister who kind of was made aware of this and on insiders I was kind of shocked maybe isn't the right word at this point but had more or less made the calculation, a completely political calculation that he was going to put the interest of the Nationals and their additional ministerial positions that he had managed to negotiate over digging down into this issue when it came to his attention. Did you find that a bit extraordinary to be honest? Well I mean in some ways I don't think in anything that Barnaby Joyce says or does, you tend to have a high bar for what is extraordinary. The Joyce bar of extraordinary is something else but yeah look obviously at the time then a further question should have been asked. I think it got sort of tied up in all the hullabaloo over net zero negotiations and the goings on between the liberals and the Nationals at the time. I guess the other thing with the PEP 11 decision and Morrison making the announcement at the time is he stood up and he said I am making this decision, I have the authority to make this decision. People assumed and journalists included those who were paying attention to the PEP 11 thing which is obviously very much a local focus for people in those seats but wasn't really sort of on the national agenda. People knew that Pitt had been opposed to it. People knew that this was a captain's call from Scott Morrison and I think people assumed and they say in journalism never assumed that he had just had sort of pulled rank to make that decision but no one had any idea at that stage that he'd obviously not just pulled rank but he pulled the portfolio and had kind of almost threatened Keith Pitt saying if you don't make the decision that I want you to make I'll make the decision for you because I'm also secretly the minister. I mean it was fairly extraordinary that that didn't become apparent at the time and pretty extraordinary that the Nationals didn't make more of a song and dance about it when they became aware of it way back in mid 2021 but again I think if we recall the context Barnaby Joyce was busy negotiating you know billions of dollars for boondoggles across the regions. This was obviously something they were prepared to cop. They also obviously believed that Scott Morrison was making the decision because he thought it would help them save those seats which they subsequently lost but you know clearly there was political shenanigans going on behind the scenes that again you know should have been made public and where. There's this common theme across it all that it's almost been staring in plain sight that there was this huge encroachment on the power of the Prime Minister. I'm just blown away that our friends at News Limited who had the scoop of the year thought it was a positive and kind of downplayed it which you know I'm sure they've got some justification for it but I can't see it but you know there's a bit of there's a few comments in the chat sort of thinking about the role of the GG and the case for a republic and whether what we expected the GG to do in a situation like this where it is such a purely ceremonial role and if there was a role that had some form of more legitimacy or authority to be acting on our behalf whether it would have played out any differently but I'm going to answer this question. And the idea Sarah which I think came out in the Prime Minister's press conference where he's kind of defending all of this stuff he was more like well I said publicly I made the decision and it was you know the stupid press gallery who didn't say did you make that decision as the Minister I found that to be quite a justification. I mean that was just perfectly as well like not I mean it was sort of emphasising that he'd made the decision but not telling the public or the parliament that he made the decision as the relevant minister at the time. It was just extraordinary. It was great seeing him trotting out the latest hits again at that press conference it was like watching a Pixies concert doing their best album right? Look it was sort of I mean the thing with this is it's so on brand like everything about it was so Scott Morrison like it's Scott Morrison like condensed it's like the essence of Scott Morrison. The genre. It's like you know we should have seen it coming because it's just it's very much him but yeah just back to your point about you know stupid media who you know should have been aware of the intricacies of the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act 2006 which I just had to quickly Google so I remembered the name of it. You know like it was sort of who was following closely who the joint decision maker is under that act and you know it was but yes Scott Morrison would never would never take responsibility for something and that press conference was yeah just absolutely true to type. Yeah Sarah I've got another question here from Robin Thurston that says are there any potential long-term ramifications between the Liberals and the Nationals after the portfolio takeover we have seen that Karen Andrews a Liberal Minister had called for his resignation a lot of other colleagues really hadn't gone that far but yeah at the end of the day it was Keith Pitt who was served essentially and you know we know that is an agreement I think one of the other Nationals was talking about this being a breach of that agreement. Do you think that's going to have any long-term implications for that partnership? Look it may just degrade the trust further between the two parties which is you know is not high at the best of times. Obviously the calculations for ministries in a coalition government are just based on crude arithmetic and you know based on how many members of the Nationals are in the coalition party room that determines how many spots they get on the front bench. So I don't think so but obviously you would expect the Nationals to be going in with they will be going in as suspicious as ever with the Liberals intentions and they'll use this I'm sure to ensure that whatever they are able to extract in the next coalition agreement whenever that may be if it's you know who knows what the parliament will look like if wherever in that situation you know at least I don't see it happening in the short term but it really depends on the numbers. I mean the Nationals obviously did a lot better than the Liberals at the last election and the Liberals numbers were quite diminished in the party room now so in terms of long-term ramifications I don't think so but yeah perhaps just as I said increases the level of distrust between the two. Yeah another question here is from Sophia McGrain and she asked what affect the Morrison government's brief flirtation with lefty economic intervention during early COVID might have had on the shift in public opinion which I think you kind of referenced Sarah but Pete we had free child care for a period of time we had a wage subsidy scheme that the unions had pushed super hard for in JobKeeper we doubled the unemployment benefit and lifted tens of thousands of people out of poverty overnight after which we then plunged them back way below the poverty line but there were some serious interventions there is those polling results that we've gone through today you know how much can we link that back to some of those big interventions during the pandemic? Aren't they trendsetters? Absolutely and it was interesting that when it was no longer an academic argument but there was a real crisis government needed to do the things that people want government to do all the time and I think the other interesting thing to reflect on was that was the moment where the public was behind Morrison and then there was this rush to snap back to normal and normal meant government staying out of the way letting the market rear building up the fossil fuel sector all that stuff again what we're seeing here is that people are saying no we don't want to go back to the way things were and in fact I sort of read it more fundamentally that I think if you look around the world the crisis is in many ways continuing it's not like the pandemic's over and it's not like budgets are repaired and it's not like trust has been restored in our institutions and that moment where we thought government was doing the job like why shouldn't people expect that to be the normal? The problem of course is as we said earlier without a secure base to fund that it does become a little bit performative. Again this is why I say if this process is managed well not to summit our way to a solution but to set up get the settings right for the next term or to empower with people trusting government to not just depart from their lives but fill the needs I think there's real positivity and you know Morrison wants to claim a bit of credit for that good luck to him. Yeah because Sarah again the calculation there being a political one on the one hand they're not wanting to break an election promise and as Pete said they weren't the architect of the stage three income tax cuts on the other hand they were legislated well before we had a pandemic or any kind of economic crisis or supply chain issues or rising inflation they were legislated in a very different time and there's big risks I think for labour even if they do just the wave them through that's you know much less revenue permanently for all future labour governments who are in as well as the obvious inequality of it so yeah there's still probably a long way to go on some of making the case for some of those reforms. I mean the problem I've got is that not only are they already legislated but they're legislated to come into effect in 2024 before the next election so it's very difficult for them to do something this term without breaking an election promise but going to the next election promising to wind something back that's already in place is even more difficult so yeah how you going to put taxes back up again? Yeah like and you know that would just be a gift to the opposition people wouldn't concern themselves with the nuance or the detail it would just be you know labour's going to you know put their hand. Well the only way through would be to do it John Howard and seek a mandate and delay it for a year like that's the only way through. Yeah I mean yeah yes potentially try delaying it but they're due to come into effect in 2024 so you know how you know the timing of that is tricky. I suspect what they will do instead is allow them to happen and then they'll come up with some way to sort of claw back some of that revenue through other means. I'll take that to the next election. That's it for today. Thank you all for listening to our recording of our live show Pole Position hosted by the Australia Institute. You can take a look at the slides discussed during the webinar on the Essential Media website. Thank you to the Guardian Australia audio team for helping getting this together. Jane Lee produced this episode and Miles Martignoni is the show's executive producer. I'm Sarah Martin see you next time.