 This is The Guardian. Big thing down here, especially in Tasmania, is the word change. It scares them slightly. They're alright once they take that step, but it's convincing them that they have to take that step, and convincing them now nine years later, and it's the worst the government's ever seen, and that the Tasmanians have probably ever seen. It is time for change. We have to try something new. Hello, lovely people of pods. This week I am on the road. I'm in Tasmania, and with me this week is Jackie Lambiek. Hello, how are you going? It's very good to be talking to Jack in the wild. So basically I've been down with my dear friend Mike Bowers to the two marginal Tasmanian seats in the north, Bass and Braden. We've been gathering impressions from voters and from other candidates, but I'm very interested in Jackie's view of, I mean, look, what, we're two, three weeks out from an election? Anyway, it doesn't matter. It's close. What's your impression of how Tasmanians are coming at this electoral battle? I think what I'm hearing out of Tasmania is something I've been hearing for a long time, and it seems to have really got a lot worse going into this election is how much of a gutful we've actually had. It doesn't matter which party it is, to be honest. They've lost trust and they've lost faith in most politicians out there, and that is really, really sad. To me, they're not really actually talking about the election. They're worried, right now we have a bloody housing issue down here. Our health is the worst in Australia that you could possibly get. There's ambulance ramping, you know, the closure of aged care being open and closing down. That seems to be one we do have per capital, a big population of ageing down here in Tasmania, just how that what they're feeling out there, especially those people in aged care, have been having shutdown from their families. It's been going on for two years and it's still going on, which is a bit of a worry for their mental health. The other big thing down here is, and I have tried as much as I have tried, there's 300 counsellors out there that could be put on the Medicare scheme, so they are paid out of that so I can get those counsellors in with our kids. Right now, one in four children down here in Tasmania is apparently suffering from some sort of psychological illness and that is terribly, terribly worrying. And what do you think people, what do you think voters think of Scott Morrison at this point in time? I think for them, they, like I said, I just, I don't know if I'm getting a full read from them or not. They're actually not, I think they're so sick and tired of talking about the major parties. It's the little things that are really affecting their lives. And the other thing, obviously, the things that's really broken through in the last few weeks has been the full price. That's absolutely kidding them. And it's great that you can offer a public transport out there, but I just want to tell the people on the Greens here in Tasmania that the best public transport is where all the money is and where all the rich people is and good luck with that. And I've got, you know, out in those public housing areas and out in those more vulnerable areas, the public transport is crap here in Tasmania. Let's be brutally honest about that, let alone telling your mother to go to work and put her two children on a bus is the best way forward and drop them off at daycare on the way. This is just rubbish. These are the solutions that we're coming up with. Here's the solution. The petrol's through the roof, drop the excise, why this is going on. When it settles back down, then take the excise back. No worries, but Jesus. You know, some pretty simple solutions out there and they don't want to use them. But in terms of, I absolutely agree with what you're saying, because everybody that we've spoken to when we've been here is thinking about a minor party one by another. So I totally get what you mean. But again, sort of broad perceptions. People are cranky with Morrison for different reasons. So I'm just, for like, obviously it's a national audience. Do you think Tasmanians are standing there with baseball bats waiting to grab him or what do you reckon? I would hope that Tasmanians are a little bit kinder than that. But I just think there's been a lot of mixed messaging through your sole deliverance. I think the real test was the COVID. It was great to have the JobKeeper and things like that out there. And that was a bit of a saviour. But the way that's been handled has been pretty bad. The way that the, you know, whether it's been the fires or whether it's been the floods, the way that he seems to show up, or already is now showing up out there that people can see seems to be late to the party every time, you know, very indecisive. And then you've got the other side of it because I guess Albo is untested. A big thing down here, and especially in Tasmania, is the word change. It scares them slightly. They're all right once they take that step, but it's convincing them that they have to take that step and convincing them now nine years later and it's the worst the government's ever seen and that the Tasmanians have probably ever seen. It is time for change. We have to try something new. A number of people have said to us here, we just, Albo's sort of invisible to non-existent. We don't really have a handle on him. So do you think that's a problem for Labor if there is an inclination around the country? And I'm not saying whether there is or whether there isn't. I just mean if there is, right? Is, Albany's lack of definition with a lot of voters, do you think that's a significant problem for him at this point? I think with Albany's is when you have a look at the number of senators Tasmania has and we have 12 and I think five or six of them are Labor and they're not out there selling Albany's like they should do and they're being very quiet. That's not helping the situation. We also have five electorates down here. Three of them are Liberal. One is Labor. Julie Collins is very, very quiet. You never hear anything out of her either. That's actually not helping Albo at all. And then, of course, you have Andrew Wilkie. So if you go and ask the people of Tasmania, to name a couple of politicians, you'll more than likely find it's me and Andrew Wilkie. That's who they'll name. That's who they know. And they'll chuck Erica Betts in there. That's it. They can't name anything else. So Labor's brought this on itself. If you're not going to go out there and you're not going to do the work and you're going to stick to a certain part of Tasmania and not do what I've had to drive to do is be all over Tasmania like a rash, a big rash, you ain't in the game. Simple as that. Picking up from the rash. Let's go. Do you know the other thing is, I think, some of these choices, you've got Labor down here at the moment, we're shaking our heads. They're following what Libbles have offered out. And some of it makes no... There's no business cases out there, but they're going to follow what and say, well, if Libbles doing that, must be the right thing to do. So we'll throw our money behind it as well. Oh, my God. What do you mean by that specifically? Well, let's have a look at hydrogen for one, right? They want to do this big hydrogen hub up at Bell Bay. The reason the investors are pulling back, because they know what I do, there's not enough water to drive hydrogen up there at Bell Bay. It's as simple as that. If you're going to drive hydrogen in Tasmania, you'll be doing it where most of your rainfall goes, and that is down the West Coast, and that is where you'd be starting. OK, so... You gave me a vivid rash. Sorry, Jackie. You gave me a vivid rash picture. And what I mean by that is I'm semi-apologising, because for the opening of this conversation, I've kept you talking about the major parties, rather than your own electoral effort, which from what we can see around the place is quite significant. So tell us about that, running a state... Well, a state campaign for a federal election. We were talking to Craig Garland a little earlier, up the road. He told me a great story anyway about a bit of happenstance that's enabled him to pay for his posters and all that sort of stuff. How are you marshalling resources in order to run this campaign? Yeah, so I think for me, because I've been out there on the game for so long, I was very lucky when I had my two years on the sidelines after I was down on Section 44, where there was certain TV that kept me on regularly. I managed to do Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here. That kept me out there. I didn't have time to raise a lot of money. Whatever I raised from that program itself, paid for radio ads going into the last election. Nothing in the last seven or eight weeks. Ours, I think, is a lot of boots on the ground. For the last six weeks, you've seen it... As soon as out of traffic lights, waving our signs, waving to people. We've got social... I have massive social media, so we're doing everything we can to plug into that, to get that out there. So we're using everything that we can at a really, really low price. I guess the good thing with us is that, on average, our political donations are about $27. I think we've had one at $5,000, and there's been two or $3,000 given to us. They've been the most substantial donations we've had. One good thing for me is, and I get that off the hook, is first of all, I don't have to deal with big political donations and take orders from political donors, which is one good thing, and Jackie Lambie Network has no factions inside their network. So we're good. We're good to go. LAUGHTER What about... Let's think about minor parties. And I agree that there does seem to be a great deal of interest here in parties that are not the major parties, right, at this point in time. So you've got One Nation, you've got the Palmer Party as well. I don't know if the Liberal Democrats are contesting down here. I'm not sure. But anyway, look, there's competition, obviously, around in the micro-party space. One thing we have been hearing quite a bit about and about is people are, you know, angry about vaccination mandates, that sort of stuff. Now, you took quite a strong stand in Canberra in a speech that was, you know, very well publicised on this question. And that does differentiate you from some of the other players around the micro-party or minor-party arena. What do you think about that issue? What I do know is Tasmania has just over 99% fully vaccinated people on this island. We, and a lot of us that have been out there and be vaccinated are very aware that we have an ageing population down here and we have a great deal of them. So, you know, I think there is people still annoyed that their employers, they have a choice as well. And this is what they're not getting. They have a choice, yes, that they can go and get vaccinated to keep their jobs, or if they don't want to, their employer has a choice to say, I'm not feeling safe with you being around the rest of my people. That is the choice that they have. So I understand, trust me, I get some sign language and it's not that pleasant out there doing those signs and that is over the anti-vax stuff. It's certainly, I do not see it being the issue it was maybe three months ago down here. People have accepted now that they've had to be double vaccinated and they're getting on with their lives and they are grateful to have their freedoms back by doing that. That's what I'm getting. It's interesting though if you're getting that, because people, we've sort of noticed this around the country, right? People who are really animated by that issue. They're really emotional about it. It's sort of like they're really revved about it. But you think it's a minority. Yeah, I believe it's a minority. You always see the minority. It doesn't matter what it's over, it seems to have the largest, you know, the loudest voice. There's no doubt about that. So like I said, they have choice, like we had a choice. If you don't want to get vaccinated, then pay the consequences. I don't know what else to say about that. So, you know, there is 99 point something percent of us down here in Tasmania decided to get double vaccinated and that's what we've done and we're getting on with our lives. Those are the ones out there that haven't been vaccinated. It seems that because most of Australia's now been vaccinated, it's really, I don't think it's, I don't think it seems to be waning now that employees are asking for vaccination certificates because I always thought as soon as 90% of Australians were vaccinated, whatever was left, so we'll just deal with it. So let's get on with it. So harping on about vaccination now is a little bit late in coming into the show. I think we're over that. Most of us have gone and thought and believe we've done the right thing by the nation, we've been vaccinated, that's what we've done. So if you haven't been vaccinated, that's fine, that is your choice. If you end up getting sicker than the rest of us, once again, that is your choice. But, you know, to take any more freedoms off them, when I understand that 90% vaccinated, the rest of us, everybody else got their freedoms back as well. That's what I'm understanding and we've certainly gone over that quota. A couple of other local issues again that we've picked up and around, around and about the place. Obviously, certainly with some people, large scale salmon farming in this part of the country is like boom, cracker tower, large. I mean, that's not even a sentence, but you know what I mean, right? It's a really hot button issue. Where do you line up on that debate? Yeah, so salmon farming is a lofty bait down here right across Tasmania and yeah, it makes a mess. And sooner or later, it's going to come unstuck at the hip. There's no doubt about that. I have no doubts whatsoever. They're going to over farm and destroy the paths that they're in in Tasmania. There is no doubt, but no, not according to those companies out there. So we'll leave it at that. There is a new one that they want to start just up the top of, just out of here more so over near Stanley. The thing is, I'm only just seeing the uplift on this side. People just speaking to me over the last three or four weeks because it's been out there in the paper a little bit more. So I'm just waiting to see what sort of uplift is going to come out of this over the next three or four weeks. It seems to have the paper says something and then the heads come up and they go back down. So, you know, we've got a lot of local fishers over here that don't want it and I don't blame them. Quite frankly, we already know the best rate is really rough out there and whether or not those nets will stay intact, that's the other thing. Quite frankly, there are a lot of us saying, we think you're wasting your time, go elsewhere or take them, you know, take them down in calmer waters and take them further away from the island. There's no doubt about that, but there is no doubt, yeah, they have made a mess over the years. You've only got to go down to Macquarie Island. You've got to learn about farming crops. You never put the same crop and leave it in the same paddock for 10 years. It will ruin the paddock. So what do they do? They put these fishnets in, they don't move them and they keep stocking these fish up with more and more and feeding them all. So it's just destruction that's going to the bottom of the ocean. And so in the event one of your candidates could pick up a lower house, see, you don't sound like you're into it. You don't sound like you like that large-scale salmon farming, but what, am I verbally new or is that your position? I don't like it and I think there's other options that you can see down here. We could actually have the salmon, we could have it actually on land and it's a lot cleaner, that sort of thing. There are other options, but they don't want to transfer over to that. And I just worry that maybe six, seven years ago when I didn't know enough about salmon, it sort of wasn't on my agenda, but you see it now. I mean, I eat salmon and I have to worry about the quality that's coming out these days and things like that. And for me, I do believe that they're over farming down here and they're going to continue to do that and it will ruin us. But more importantly, ruin the Tasmanian branch. And I actually think we're starting, for us, I think we're starting to lose any control or whatever control we've got left over that salmon farming out there that's just off the sides of the islands, especially down there in Hobart. Okay, and the other big thing is the marinist link with the mainland and there's a big offshore wind development. I say, is it Robbins Island? Or I'm just sorry, don't have the note exactly in front of me. But anyway, there's a big development. There's some discussion about some transmission infrastructure which is going to go inland in the state. And I've seen reports of, you know, perhaps farmers have their land compulsorily acquired. So again, another cracker tower issue. It's actually not an issue, but the state government's not listening to the other proposal that's been put on the table that has its own investors. It's not asking for any state or federal money. There's about, there's well in excess of 468 turbines that have come up from the west coast through rugged land that certainly can't be used for anything else apart from a little bit of mining. And quite frankly, if you're not mining in Tasmania by now, trying to open new mines in the future, good luck with that. I actually put a lot of that onto the Minerals Council and how much pool they've got within the Liberal Party because quite frankly, that's the project that should have been ticked off. That's west coast renewables. They've already done, I think, 68 wind turbines down there down the west coast, which they can see is working very well. So we could have all this ticked off and we could have not just that firming into the Marinus link, but we could also, by having that many wind turbines down here, we could go into the hydrogen as well off that one lot of windfiling that's down there. Everybody knows that and everybody's questioning why they're going to ruin something like Robins Island over there that can only has the capacity to do, I think, is it 78 or 86 or something? It was originally smaller. They're putting more there now. When we've already got this one, the plan of attacks been there for a very, very long time. And I'm wondering all the state government has not ticked off on that and why it is still persisting with Robins Island. So it's their own worst enemy down here, honestly. But is it, did you just answer your own question in the sense that you think the minerals or the local minerals industry is more powerful, therefore the state government's looking for something that doesn't impact people's mining laces or something? Just forgive me because I don't know enough about the local landscape. Yes, I think the Minerals Council believes that some of these wind turbines, the ones coming up from the West Coast, that already have investment, may be put on a bit of their patch. Well, I'd remind them that if you get mining up in the future in those patches, good luck with that, that's the first thing. And my second thing is that you can move those wind turbines by so many. You can move them over by a K or 2K. They're still effective. You can move them outside the area if you need to. So I have to ask why they're having this big fight with Robins Island, that state and federal Liberal Party, when there's already a solution that is sitting there in front of them. These men have spent the last six or eight years trying to get this investment up and going. They have full investment, private investment out there. They're not asking for any money and why they can't get moving. Let's come back now to your campaign. Now, you're not up for the Senate this time, Jackie. You're serving at your six-year term, but you're trying to get a colleague and a friend of yours, I think, elected to the Senate. And you've got candidates certainly in both of these seats, Bass and Braden. What's the prospect of success? Well, certainly that Senate seat. If we don't win that, then blow me over. If I can't knock Erica Betts over, we're doing something terribly wrong. That's all I say. It's either between Tammy Terrill or Erica Betts taking goddamn pictasmanians. There's nobody else in the running. I think the second thing is for us is that when it comes to those lower house candidates, there'll be certainly three of them that we have looking at having a run, having a taste of it this time. They've still got businesses to run and family. They're having a taste, hopefully. So next time, they can be out there a lot earlier and have half a chance. This time, what we want to be able to do is show them ages when it comes to Bass, Braden and Lions, is I suggest you get to the table and talk to us about preference deals, because I would think that the kingmaker here, or king queen, whatever, or the queenmaker, is going to be the Jackie Lambie network and where those preferences go in those three lectures. Well, it's like you read my mind, because that was what I was going to ask you. Obviously, you will be very critical, I think, because you're going to get a chunk of the vote, regardless of how it pans out. So what's your inclination? Well, the inclination and what we've seen is we're certainly sitting around that 10% or 15% in those electorates, so that should be rowing for both those major parties, and I'm surprised they're not sitting here with champagne bottles just waiting at the front door ready to speak to me, but they're not in any hurry. What's new out there? So no one's spoken to you? We've had minimum contact with both of them, which I have to be honest with you. I thought earlier would be better, but I think later will be better, because the later it is, the more I can see how they're actually performing out there. So, you know, are we going to get same-same or are we going to get a little bit of difference? What I do know is that if Labor's proposing to do some of these things that the Liberals are, that they haven't done their homework on some of these projects, except for the future of Tasmania, and they're not going to work. So that's very worry. What about, though, and I accept what you said, and why wouldn't you say anything other than what you've just said at this point, right? Why wouldn't you seek to influence where the major parties end up on some of these really important local issues, right? Why wouldn't you do that? But it's hard for me because obviously I haven't watched you in your natural habitat. I haven't been down here watching you here. I've watched you obviously in Canberra, which is where we both hang out. It kind of boggles my mind that you'd think about the Liberals. It does. I'm not saying that you would automatically vote with Labor either because, you know, you have conflicts with them as well. But you've been so critical of Scott Morrison. You really have. So, like, is this a genuine beauty parade? Look, I think for us, it's, like I said, we haven't seen the performance in Labor. The nine years I've done up there in and out, that's always been Liberal. So, you know, is there a difference between them? That's the question I want to know. I suppose the only way we're going to do that is with Anthony Albanese. Just because Scott Morrison is not performing doesn't mean that maybe some of those Liberals and other electorates are not performing either, you know? So I try and look at not what Scott Morrison's doing, but if you're a Liberal Party member, are you providing for your community? Because it comes down to that. And if it means if we can, if we do a preference deal with Labor and remove you, will that new person come in, actually be able to provide more or less or about the same? So I guess it's looking at all that. Yeah, well, you're right to pull me up on that. It was sort of idiotic, really, in a way. No, no, no, but you're right to pull me up. So, like, obviously, Bridget Archer, for example, in Bass, has made herself a bit of a pain in the neck with the Prime Minister on, well, I don't know, a number of issues now. Is that what you mean? If a member or a putative member is prepared to be a pain in the ass, not to put too fine a point on it, is, you know, is that what you're getting at? I think by being a pain in the ass, has she delivered for Bass? That's what I'm asking. Is she getting all the stuff out of Morrison's? She should be for Bass. Well, what's the answer? I don't see a lot of offerings going into Bass at this point in time, so that would show me that he's obviously not backing Bridget himself. You know, I can talk to the people of Bass like I have been, and you've got...it is quite conservative in Bass itself. So there are people up there that believe that, you know, that by her doing to the Liberal Party what she's done, she has betrayed them. And then you've got other people going out, well, good on her for stepping out. And then other people saying to me, well, why didn't she just go out as an independent? Why didn't she get up and leave? Why is she staying there? So there's all that, but, you know, what is going to be delivered to Bass, which is not a lot on the table that I can see right now coming from the Liberal Party, and is that the best thing for Bass? But is that the test, right? Is the test more stuff in terms of, you know, you mentioned housing, you mentioned health, you know, how the services are quite poor here. Is that what you mean by... Yeah, okay, well... Yeah, so I think for me it's what you're going to offer, and have you done your homework? Have you done your homework and actually seen what Bass actually needs and gone into discussion with them? And even as a serving member now, have you done your due diligence and not just passed out a little couple of thousand bucks here and there, and what purpose has that actually served, and what has been the outcome of that? So, you know, it's just... It's watching all of that. I mean, you know, you can walk around and you can see the changes in the air. They're just not 100% sold on Albinazi. And again, just sort of picking up that point, right, and you made this point before Julie Collins isn't really backing him in or is not very visible or, you know, all of that. Is that part of your calculation as well? I mean, obviously, you're just making a general observation about, you know, what is or isn't happening at a political level. But you're the one that's got to make the decision about where your preferences go. Doesn't matter with Julie Collins because she's in a safe suit. So unless we were to come up at 20%, we're not going to make any difference. We know that. It's the same with Clark. We can run in Clark, but we know Andrew's got it sewn up right now tomorrow. So our three biggest suits that we can make a massive difference in are Bass Lines and Braden, and all quite comfortable because that's outside of Hobart, to be honest. We always poll much better on the outside of that than what we do on the inside. And Eric Abetz, you mentioned a minute ago, just with your Senate campaign. Again, as we've driven around, we've seen all of these billboards of Eric Abetz. There's no obvious liberal branding on them. I can't remember what they say, but it's something like Eric Abetz for Tasmania or something like that, right? What do you make of all that? We actually thought about doing big liberal stickers and just putting them at the bottom of them. We thought, no, we best not do that because that's sabotaging his signs. And that would not be fair because I don't like it when people draw on my signs and do other things. So he's been let off lightly. But I really, we were this close to wanting big liberal stickers to stick on the bottom of it. And I thought, oh, we best not do that. That's a little bit naughty. Though it's still killing me that I didn't do it. But again, what about this am I not getting, Jackie, because I'm not a local, right? Eric Abetz, for me, he's been around in politics so long, he's so identified with being a Tasmanian liberal senator. Like, I don't compute this. I honestly need you to explain this to me because I don't understand. Yeah, I think he's been very lucky, well, not lucky. He's done his homework and his due diligence in the past when it comes to winning selection first on the ticket. I just don't think he did his due diligence this time. There is a change over to within the Liberal Party with the Old Stale Award. Unfortunately, they're passing away because they do have an older, an older demographic in that Liberal Party. Labor's not far behind them. And the younger people are not volunteering to go to help any major parties out. So for some reason, look, Eric lost out there. He asked everyone to vote for him first, no doubt. And then forgot to say, if you don't vote for me first, you better put second down on that through him out. He's now, I don't think Eric Abetz, unless it's from the beginning, I won't go back 27 years ago. But this is probably one of the first time Eric Abetz has been removed down to third place on the ticket. And quite frankly, I think he's struggling with that. And doing a below the line thing, he's not a Lisa Singh. You know, he certainly doesn't have the looks of Lisa either, or the voice, or that multicultural society behind them, especially in Hobart, he's going to really struggle. And unless you're in Hobart, most people have got no idea who Eric Abetz is up here. That's the other thing. This is really what I'm getting to. And Lisa Singh's the obvious case in point. I was sort of thinking, oh my God, he's doing a Lisa Singh. Like looking at these, I'll be honest with you, I'm very grateful she didn't run a below the line last time, or I may not have won. She'd already skipped out because she'd blow it away. What she did, watching her do that below the line back in 2016, I think it was, she smashed it. Well, if you're listening, Lisa, there's an endorsement. Anyway, but see, yeah, in my head, what I was trying to say, obviously not very coherently, a minute ago, was that I just can't imagine that people don't know Eric Abetz is a liberal. But you're saying up here, he's less well known, is that right? Yeah, I'm up here, the Eric Abetz name doesn't start. It may do in Bass, and it may do down there in Hobart, because like I said, it's more conservative in Bass. So that sort of carries on in the middle of Hobart there. But most people might know, may have heard of Eric, but that's about as far as it goes. And if you're not relating him to the Liberal Party, there's probably people out there, especially here on the Northwest Coast, going, oh, is that another independent here or something? Well, it's just intriguing. It really is. Anyway, puts Tasmania first. Mike Bowers, who's sitting in this conversation, because he's with me this week, he's saying, the posters, if you're interested, guys say Eric Abetz puts Tasmania first, and there's a big picture of Eric Abetz, but no party branding on it. All right, let's finish up this way. Who's going to win the election? Gee, I think, surely, surely Morrison's got to be gone. You would think he's got to be gone. I just, I know change is a big thing, not just for everyone out there, but myself as well. But quite frankly, the Liberals in nine years have gone, have gone through Abbott, Turnbull, Morrison, and they've hit rock bottom. I think it's time for the Liberal Party, for the greatness of the nation. They need to go away and have a good look at themselves for a few years and resort themselves out. That's what I think. I think they're a very divided party. They are struggling, and I always said that about Scott Morrison. I don't believe he's got leader capabilities in him, and the more pressure you put on him, which is what's happening now, the more he will fall apart, and that will continue in the next six or seven weeks. Do you think, because you said to me, change is hard. What's your read of the mood out there? I mean, I'm sure you're channeling that in your answer, but do you think that your folks out there, out in Burney and beyond, do you reckon they are ready for a change? I think they are ready for a change, and also once again come down to our preferences, because like I said, you've already got two of the electorates down south. They're already sown up. We know that. The only ones that are up for grabs are Lyons, Braden and Bass, and they're the ones up for grabs. That's where we hold our biggest percentage, and we'll be watching them all the way to the end until we need to give preferences out. That's what we'll be doing. Yeah, well, quite a contest down there. Jackie, thank you so much for your time. We do appreciate it. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of this show. Thank you to you guys for listening, sharing, et cetera. It's budget week next week. God help us. Oh, God, Jackie looked like I needed to send the smelling salts in her direction. Yes, budget next week. Neither of us are going to space. Once I've been in the submarine, I'm going up a spot. She's not really going to space. Anyway, we'll be back next week.