 This is The Guardian. Whenever anyone's asking me about how's the economy going, I'm going, well, it's pretty good for the fact we've got inflation interest rates at basically zero and we've got the biggest budget deficit of all time. Take that away. And I'm not so sure how it's going. So it's going well, pumped up full of steroids. But I don't think it really wants to go cold turkey quite yet. Hello, lovely people of pods. Welcome to the show. You are with Catherine Murphy on Australian Politics and with me two of my favourite people. One, two, one, two, three, four. It's Jericho Murphy and Wright. Come on down to the stage. That's what we're doing right now. That is exactly what we're doing. I'm with Shane Wright, who is economic supremo at the Nine Facts Papers. And pop culture reference, reference. Also, Greg Jericho from The Guardian. And these days, the Australian Institute as well. I reckon you'd be the lead guitarist. Yeah, I think so. I'm definitely not bass. No, I play bass. Yeah. Murph's on the drum. I think. No, I'm definitely. The Ginger Baker of Jericho Murphy and Wright. Like temperamentally, I am definitely a drummer. I'm not going to argue. I'm not going to argue. Anyway, the three of us are going to talk about the economy. Cram from Spiderbake. A bit. Great drummer. Anyway, to do something a little different at the top of this episode, before we drill down into the various things, I'm going to throw indicators at my dear friends and they're going to give me one or two word responses. One or two. One or two. I'm glad no one is seeing the gesture that Shane Wright is currently pushing in my direction. Anyway, focus, guys. Focus. Here we go. Here we go. All right. Inflation. Inflation. Trancetry. Up. OK. Cost of living. Rising. Up. Word. Wages. Not going up. Stagnant. Like a pool berry. But not a nice one. Maybe some mausies. Yeah. A lot of mausies, I would say. Frogs. I like frogs. Unemployment. Unemployment. Falling. Exceedingly low. And good news. Good news. Good news. Yeah. And what's my next one? Interest rates. They're coming up. Like a flower. Sorry. God. Rising. Later. Rising later. I'm drinking. I'm going deep base there, aren't you? Low time. Interesting supply chains. I was going to say shag, but let's say stuffed. You stole my words. I know. It's shag. If you go with shag. Yeah. Utterly shagged. Ooh. Ooh. I'm using the two words. You're going adverb too. Yeah. OK. Good. OK. Well, that has, with a few digressions, set us up nicely, I think, for a conversation about what's happening in the domestic economy. So let's drill down now into a bit of detail and try and share the sum of these parts. What is going on in the domestic economy at the moment? So why don't we start with interest rates? So how worried will the Reserve Bank at the moment be about getting the interest rate call right? Well, I was just saying to somebody, this is the bank that cut interest rates, announced three days after the last election. Oops. We've got interest rates wrong. We better start cutting them. So that's their immediate track record in terms of interest rate settings. They're at point one. And they know that the longer you keep interest rates at such a silly low level, the greater the risk that people will do really silly things with such aforementioned cheap money. Yes. So you can see, like, remember, if it's only four months ago, the net or five months ago, we won't be lifting rates until 2024. That was the key message. Now it's, oh, it's plausible we could be raising them this year. Financial markets have priced in a full percentage point by this full year, which I think Greg had conceived. If you whacked a full percentage point on the cash rate in the next 10 months, there might be some major macroeconomic ramifications. Yes. I suggest interest rates obviously will go up. They kind of have to go up because the chainsaw in point one is just not stupid long term. No. But, you know, I don't think that we're not going to see a 1990-style sort of hiking of rates. This gets us to the politics of it, because if you read John... We go to John Howard's autobiography of his term. He... And I only had... I rechecked this just not long ago. He makes mention of the decision made in the 2007 election campaign by the RBA to lift interest rates, which it did. And he said, we were under the understanding that there was an understanding that the bank would not make any major moves in and around an election campaign. And Glenn Stevens says, stuff this. We have to make a call. We moved forward to 2019, where Phil Lowe says all up... All leading up to the May election that year, saying, right, the economy, interest rates are going to go up, there's a bit of spare capacity, everything's going fine. Morrison claims victory on the Saturday night, the Monday afternoon, there's Phil Lowe in Brisbane giving a speech saying, oh, well, well, everything I've said before, maybe not right. Next meeting, we're going to start cutting rates. Huge call. Both hugely political calls. And I don't know if people quite understand, even though the RBA is an independent authority, its decisions are heavily political. And in those two instances, you can see either doing something or not holding off a decision, like there was no reason why Phil Lowe didn't make the decision in April during an election campaign to say, we've got to cut rates because he already had that data that he was going to make the decision upon. So this is why I think, no, there's no chance they'll move before the election. Yeah. Because it would just be... It seems unlikely. Yeah, because the politics of it, and they are acutely aware of it. And remember, both Labor and the government have committed to an independent review of the RBA, whomever wins office. And so I think that issue is also floating in and around there because the RBA has got one job, which is get inflation between two and three. Hasn't done that. Didn't do it for seven consecutive years. Missed on wages. And then before COVID was having to cut rates in half inside four months. Like, dare I say it, the bank does make mistakes. Like, we all make mistakes. Mine has been musically related more than anything else. But in this case, the RBA's decision-making has... And when is... When disclosure... Yes...for those term... 2023. Oh, it's next year. Yeah. So, like, there was this theory that he would go through his entire term without actually lifting interest rates. Yeah, which would be amazing. And we've got to this point today where the median house price in Sydney, Melbourne, Canberra is now over a million dollars. And there are more than a million people who've taken on a mortgage over the last decade who've never seen an interest rate rise. Yeah, well, this is the thing. When you talk about macroeconomic implications, that's what you mean. OK, so there's interest rates. And I think probably the answer, the quick answer to the question was, yes, the bank will be worried about whether or not it moves at the correct time and has to keep a weather eye on the political cycle as well, right? So, OK, wages. Let's think about wages a bit more now. Will they ever increase? LAUGHTER Jesus. If anyone's listening. Lenore Taylor, this is a plea for help. Take this as a plea. Take this as a plea. From your camera office. Brother, guardian Australia. Yeah. Rather than an economic conversation. This is a public plea for a pay increase. No, no, I'm serious. Will wages ever increase? And how high can they go without triggering inflation, which we need to get to inflation in a minute, because, Shane, I was going to say to you, Shane, actually, up top, there's a reason why you and I never got out of the inflation mindset. Because it was always coming back. It was always coming back. Exactly. Anyway, but I digress. Anyway, let's wait. Yep. Well, the secretary of the Treasury, Stephen Kennedy, last week at Senate estimates actually gave us a nice little definition of how high wages can go before they start putting pressure on inflation. And that's essentially something that Philip Low has also talked about. And it's essentially inflation plus productivity. So the standard long term desire is you have inflation running at about two and a half percent. Yeah, productivity growing about one percent. So you can have wages then going up at three and a half percent. And if they do that, then there's no impact on inflation because all the increase in wages is essentially coming from one, the increase in prices and also the increase in you working better, smarter, however you want to phrase it. Yeah, that's not happening at the moment. That hasn't happened for a very long time. In fact, you could say really is it's something more a lost decade and productivity. Yes, definitely. Definitely. There's been certainly a split, I'd say, since the GFC. Productivity has risen and real wages have not or certainly have not in anywhere near that that pace. The latest wages figures that came out, if you use the CPI, you had inflation going up at three and a half percent and wages just went up 2.3 percent. So in real terms, they went down 1.2 percent. Now, certainly inflation can be a bit erratic, but even if you use the RBI's underlying inflation measures, real wages went down. And that is certainly not something that a government would be wishing, whether it's their last wages data before the election. As I pointed out today. Yes. That, yeah, you can if you look it over, it's a every three years like an electoral term. This government has overseen a point eight percent fall in real wages. It's the first time any term of government this decade, this century, it's gone backwards. Like John Howard, oh, four to seven, they went up about three point eight. The Gillard slash Rudd, they went up two point nine. It was interesting. Josh Frydenberg, never short of pushing an opinion, took to social media yesterday saying, well, in labor, real wages fell for one quarter. Yes. And they fell by the same amount that they did this quarter. And but over the over a full term, no, they rose by about two point nine. It's at the end of the day, real wages is ultimately like people say everything, nothing's important except productivity. For most people, they're real wages. Yeah. Is what matters. No, of course, because you pay the bills. But that goes to the number of the question guys. Like, I mean, I wasn't being as much. Yeah, I mean, will they will will this will this? A few things. I think the problem is, is and this is something I can remember, Gareth Hutchins and I wrote about wage, the wage crisis. I'm pretty sure it's like 2017. So this is not a new thing. The the problem is there is a lot of structural issues involved in terms of bargaining and also government policies, such as at the moment, the public sector cap on wages growth. Public sector used to kind of be a driver of of private sector wages because obviously there are trade offs that you you can get in the private sector that you don't get in the public sector. Public sector is more secure, but wages are generally lower. And so stronger wages growth in the public sector used to essentially guide it. Now, Scott Morrison has introduced sort of recommendations or I'm not sure how how it's in force directions, we'll call it that public sector or APS wages shouldn't grow faster than the private sector, which is essentially it's even doing worse than it used to be in the past, where it was a 2% cap because it's actually in effect enforcing lower wages. Not just Morrison and his government. It's just every state has done this. You can actually see in WA like their public sector pay increases. You're measuring in the ones and have been for three years now. Like that's been a government policy to just screw it all down. Rod Sims was at the press club this week and he also there was a question put to him about wage growth and he actually said lack of competition between big firms. Yes. And this is and there was a question actually put to Phil Lowe. A couple of Senate a couple of estimates hearings ago about non-competition clauses in staff. This is an issue across in the US in Silicon Valley where people can't move around. You can't poach people by offering them higher wages. Yes. So that you're into that structural some of those structural issues. You're into the demise of unions as everywhere that has been recognised as an issue that affects wages. Phil Lowe's also mentioned immigration which was very contentious late last year when he talks about especially at the bottom end if there's no international students and maybe international backpackers and you heard the farming communities complain about that and he said well the thing you do is have to offer higher wages but that wasn't the first go to for them. It was let's bring in more labour. Exactly. Yeah. So it's sort of and in an environment of inflation well there's the segue inflation obviously then business you get in this cycle where business are we saying well our input costs are increasing now is not the time obviously right so it sort of it chases its own tail. Now let's do inflation because it's important and we have as long as we've been doing these chats on the pod we've been navigating the sort of post inflation world which has always seemed a bit strange to me because of my advanced years and your advice. Well you know what I'm saying. I think we can all say. No no we've all grappled with it right. I remember writing an article I think where I sort of pointed out the first half of my life inflation had never been below 4% or something stupid like that or 3% and for the second half of my life it had rarely been above it. It's an astonishing change for the Gen X's. Yeah it's a lot for us Gen X's is all I'm saying but anyway it's back baby. It's back in a it is and yet the temporary case being led by Team Jericho over there you can see some of those arguments say around particularly oil or gas and we'll get to that in our international space. We're going to go global in a tick post. But if we get unemployment as we suppose the idea is to get unemployment under 4 then you're starting to think you do think there should be inflationary pressures there. My case against the team Trangitry is that one of the reasons we haven't seen inflation for the last 25 years is a little country called China. China price has disappeared because it's now it's modernizing the way that the Chinese economy is structured means that companies that shifted to China for ultra cheap production outlets are now moving to say Vietnam or Bangladesh. They're not nearly as important drivers of economic growth as China is just because of the size of China. So I think that step plus and bringing the huge amount of stimulus that's gone into the global economy over the last two years and which is going to hang around in terms of huge budget deficits even in this country for the next 5, 10. Low interest rates. They all contributing towards inflation maybe not out of control like let's get a wheelbarrow to buy our life of bread. Not why my republic. Not why my republic or even Venezuela was in Barbrait but we're talking about getting at something back towards two and a half to three and a half like we've had this monetary policy circles has been this whole argument. Should we have should we change our interest rate targets? The Federal Reserve now has an official policy which it will allow inflation to run a little bit higher than its target because they need to catch up. They need a bit of inflation catch up. So the economy works because ultimately Reserve Banks their targeting of inflation has occurred over the last 30 years. Over the last 30 years the housing sector in developed world countries has taken on a huge amount of debt. So inflation enabled you to eat into that. We haven't been able to use inflation to eat in those huge debts. Yes. The last speech I read from the governor and if you're listening and you think who the hell is the governor obviously the governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia he sort of basically said this is a massive paraphrase so that yes inflation is back. She's back baby. But in Australia it's different from America and other places because we've got no wages growth. So that's a conundrum isn't it? It certainly is a lot less than America. I mean Australia and American inflation generally does go in sync and but in the last six months America has zoomed ahead and we really haven't yet. And when I say sort of transit transitry I mean I don't think it is going to be above three and a half percent for very long. But I do think we'll be back in the two and a half to three percent which to be honest it's a measure of how low and how weak demand has been for the past decade that that's considered kind of inflation being back and that's actually no that's where we that's our entire economic policy is aiming for it to be there. We've missed the target for well seven eight years. Yeah. Seven to eight years. Seven to eight years. Yeah. I mean so but certainly the big question is how much of it is going to flow in over the shores because certainly America and and whatever happens in Europe eventually arrives here. Yeah. And certainly everyone is seeing with oil prices at the moment they're not definitely not going to go away. No. Oh my God we've done another segue. We have. See we're so professional I can sort of you know. This is how tight the band is. It's quite staggering. That is that is our second recorded segue in a podcast I think a record. Anyway as Greg is foreshadowed yes oil prices brings us to the global economy right which is as we speak just to just to be clear with you guys we are recording on Thursday it's about the middle of the afternoon. The last news alert I saw was Anthony Blinken saying that Russia could invade Ukraine within hours. Yeah. For Ukraine. For a local. Close their airspace I think it's the last sort of thing. Yeah. Yeah. So we're just acknowledging that's moving part. Just be gentle with us. Yes. Just be gentle. Exactly. Obviously we're in very very uncertain global environment. Social prices and and petrol prices certainly is the Australian consumers direct experience of that volatility. Yes. So what do we think about all that. Well the wars themselves though terrible for human life and social cohesion actually they do they have financial impacts but they're not recessionary impacts. Just think about just think about that. When was the Korean will boom. Which war was it in. Let me. Yeah. Yeah. The Korean will boom was started by the Korean War. Right. Australia did not go into recession during the 1960s while we were pummeling money into Vietnam. Well yeah. These are these. There's that adage about wars being good for business. There's dislocation. Long term Vietnam certainly the US. It hurt them economically. Yeah. But the macro level didn't cause a recession. No. And stagflation was that precipitate came. Was more to do with oil. Again. And high priced oil. Yeah. But in this case right. Russia think of Russia as a great big service station with a lot of oil a lot of gas. That's that's where Putin that's what Putin's based himself upon. Yes. But there are other supplies. You can see sorry OPEC. OPEC. You can see them filling in Europe's demand for oil. Yes. And we've coming. Yes it's the European fighting season. We come into spring and summer but that also means a reduction in demand for oil and for gas across Europe. Yes. So you can depending on what how long this continues and you can see that OPEC can fill in that that gap. So yes you have an upward pressure on global commodity prices. Yeah. But it's not enough to cripple the world like with Australia is talking about can we supply gas to. Yes. Which I think I think Qatar is probably the better place. Yeah because I mean we don't really have the infrastructure to do it. Do we. I mean obviously we can put gas on a tanker right. And I can see you in the overalls right now. And send it over. But you know Qatar is a bit closer. Tad closer. Yes. But so that like that's the energy side of the things. And you we know that Europe's already has moved a lot more down say the renewable energy space as well. Yes. True. I think it's going to be terrible for Ukrainians and those Russian troops on the front line. But I'm I'm not as overly worried about the economic fallout. But just at a big macro level just on the OPEC point though chaps right. Because from what I have read the sort of you know Saudis and other players were because obviously petrol prices oil prices increased prior to the current bad business in on the Ukrainian border. I'll get it there sorry. And from what I had read the sort of analysts were saying well that's them profit taking after the pandemic lowered demand. Right. But do we think that the Saudis are going to be the white knights here and just supply the world and everything will be OK. They might fill in the gap but that doesn't it's not like they're going to be flooding the market in the point where it's going it mightn't be reducing prices. So in a sense they're just they're still profit taking. They've just got a market there that they perhaps weren't able to fill in the past and now they can just keep it's not like they have to lower prices or because overall demand is not changing. Yes. Yes. It's essentially right. It's like you've you've got one player exiting the market. Almost. Yes. You've still got the same number. You know there's still the same level of demand. But certainly there there's whenever there is turbulence shall we say in in international areas that involve oil and gas the price always does go up because it's affected by market forces and also by expectations of future prices and no one's going to be thinking all prices will go down because there's a war involving Russia. No. Sure. But the change point is that it may not be as bad as it may be. I don't think it was I don't foresee sort of 1973. I think so because that was where they did shutter supply completely and there was no one really there to fill it because and now the US was now the US is a net oil producer. Yeah. Yeah. There is a lot more and also our reliance. You know we we certainly don't have the big gas guzzlers like we used to in in the 70s. But Jericho and his pink Cadillac. I mean, you know, can't you just stop and stop by Springsteen's Cadillac ranch. That's all I'm saying. I'm about to keep going. I think we need to do a member of the the super group. Excuse me. Excuse me. No, no, no. It's far too early for you to break up the bed. I'm sorry. Yes. As you were. So I think the the thing actually to me with with oil was not so much the the economic issue but how it's going to play out politically. Yes. Because if we do get that $2.00 a litre. It's the third segue. It's the third segue. Anyway, sorry. There's no way we can break up. So you know, we're hearing talk of $2.00 a litre, which is just kind of gasping to even think about how does that play? I think remember Howard moved, you know, one just over a dollar. Those were the days. Just a dollar. It is weird that there has been this sort of that it even though cost of living pressure sort of been observable for people now for now several months that it has lagged the normal political cycle. I think part of it's because we've the journalistic community still been focused so heavily on Covid. But the surveys like we had a resolve poll this week and cost of living is right up there. There was a poll out of Western Australia this week. Cost of living is the people lining up getting whacked by $2.00 or even more. I heard Greg and I did Adelaide radio yesterday and there was a caller saying, oh, it's $2.13. And I went, oh, my lord, but you can see like that sort of pain will because ultimately a tank of petrol, petrol is the biggest purchase by every household in Australia every week. And if it's going up by that much, it doesn't take long. So Howard moved after two or three months, three or four months, the whole debate over what was going on with the GST and its impact on and the lift in oil prices that was occurring then froze index indexation. Which government ended it? Tony Abbott's government indexation and Scott Morrison was there at the scene. That was Joe Hocky's infamous poor people don't drive cars. It was around that point. Yeah. But it's hard to argue that the decision was the right one because it was aiming right. We've got to fix the budget somehow. And two, it acts as a price signal. Like remember when we when governments believed in price signals, that was one of them back in the Jurassic period. So like we've we've seen the play and Morrison was asked about this actually. He's been asked a couple of times in the last few weeks. No, there's nothing moving. What's interesting because he knows cost of living is playing in the last three and a half weeks at press conferences or speeches. He has mentioned the price of electricity falling by 8% or 12 times. Yeah. Yeah. Because he knows that. Yes. And he knows that beef's up 20% or more than 20%. Taking a hound to the vet is up 10%. Childcare is up 13 and a half percent. Yeah. Health insurance premiums. Health insurance up 34%. 34 in a year. In a year. So like politicians and Morrison's no fool. He knows that Albanese, Labor's been campaigning in this space for more than a year now. Cost of living is absolute. It's always in the one or two issues of an election. Always. And the point of the segue was politics and the budget. This is where we're going to end our conversation today because the budget is what, three weeks away? Four weeks away? Yes. So obviously we have somewhat chaotically narrated a story which says there are a lot of different pressures in the economy. There are risks to the outlook, i.e. the global situation, but now we get to the budget, which is literally the last act of the current parliament. And then we will be off to the election. So if you're Josh Frydenberg, what are you doing with this budget, do you think? Trying to get reelected. Well, obviously. You're probably saying, Scott, couldn't you have called an election before it? But it made it a lot easier. It's a real juggling act, I think, more than in the past because of cost of living and inflation. It has a little bit of a smell of 2007 with Kevin Rudd and this reckless spending, my stop kind of thing, because any of that type of spending is going to obviously raise the likelihood of interest rates going up. The last thing they're going to want to do is do some spending that actually forces the Reserve Bank's hand. Yeah, well, that's an interesting thought. And spending in this space is tax cut. And this is the debate that's been going on inside Treasury right now. And there is a difference of opinion about giving, say, $8 billion to 10 million people. It's inflationary by any stretch of the imagination. So they've wedged themselves into that issue. So that's their problem. No one else's. If you're trying to come up with policies that are not inflationary or can't be painted as inflationary, then you get into spending on, say, infrastructure. And I'm still waiting for some of Josh Ridenberg's car parks to be built. As we reported this the other day, now aiming at $220,000 a space. It's out of control that way. And this is the danger of coming up with half-cocked infrastructure projects or proposals in the run-up to an election as AKA car parks in 2019. Or you can, there are the spaces, like you change the childcare subsidy. You could do that. And you'd be arguing that's deflationary and it's productivity enhancing. You could build something around that. There has been a fair discussion around tax inside Treasury over the last six weeks. But unless you're just cutting taxes for the hell of it, which has got its economic downside, then you don't want to do that on March 29 and then call an election, say, April 4. And I'm not even sure the economy really wants needs and austerity budget or... No. No, no, no. And this is a case of one, politically, you don't do the austerity budget two months out from election. No. No. It's not good for the economy at the moment because it is, you know, whenever... And this is something I always sort of mention whenever anyone's asking me about, how's the economy going? I'm going, well, it's pretty good for the fact we've got inflation interest rates at basically zero and we've got the biggest budget deficit of all time. Take that away. And I'm not so sure how it's going. So it's going well pumped up full of steroids. But I don't think it really wants to go cold turkey. I know. It was interesting. Morrison got asked about... He mentioned the budget while he was in Tasmania this week and talked about, oh, look, if you got to keep control of your budget, you go, you're running a... You just had 135 billion deficit and you're looking at, like this one might come in at 80, 85. And after an 86 the year before, like the three largest deficits in history... For miles. And you go, right, what is budget? What's management? What does it mean? And like, it's interesting that whole argument how I'm looking forward to seeing how the government portrays that during election campaign because normally that budget management stuff... Well, it's sort of central. And if you go, like if you're Jim Chalmers, you go, hold on. You've just run 135 billion deficit. What budget management have guys given up? No, I know. I've had a couple of conversations on the show with Simon Birmingham in which we've been around this point. And of course their rebuttal is, well, of course our spending is always better than labor spending. But I mean... Except for car parks. Well, exactly. Except it isn't. So it's kind of anyway, fascinating. No, I think that for a junkie, political junkie like myself, an economic junkie and a budget junkie, I'm really rock and roll with the number of addictions I have, that how you sell that message is really intriguing. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's sort of like, because there's so many of the dreadful cliche but helpful one, battlegrounds of electoral politics in Australia that feel slightly off their axis at the moment. It is going to be genuinely fascinating. But sadly that's all we've got time for. Thank you for listening to our chaos musical references and occasional... Elvis is leaving the building. And occasional... Elvis is leaving the building....degressions about the economy. Thank you to Shane and Greg, whom I love dearly, as you guys know, and I know you love them too and these episodes. So we aim to do as many of them as we can. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who is the EP of this show. Thank you to you guys for listening. We'll be back next week. Love you all. Love you. irrelevant for them alkali