 Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of Australian Politics Live. I'm Catherine Murphy, host of the show and with me in the Pod Cave, hasn't been the case for quite some time and here she is. Guest appearance. Guest Gabrielle Chan. Gabrielle Chan. She's in the Pod Cave. Always a good time in the Pod Cave. And with us is Tim Watts. It's great to be with you. Long time listener, first time guest. Tim is a Labor MP if you've not come across him in your travels. You've got a Shadow Ministry now, which of course I should have reminded myself about before we came in. No, that's right. I'm now the Shadow Assistant Minister for Communications and Subscures. Yes, correct. And he has written a really, really fascinating book which I read over the weekend and I enjoyed very much broadly on the theme of multiculturalism and that's where we're going to go basically in this conversation over the next little bit. We're going to draw Tim out on some of his observations in the book which is called... The Golden Country. The Golden Country. Australia's Changing Identity. Yes, because I left my copy outside the Pod Cave helpfully. So we're going to get into the book and we might just bring it back into some contemporary issues because those issues really can't be avoided, can they? So we may as well. That is my day job. Exactly. We may as well do that. So Gabby, do you want to kick off because you've got some...I think you two. I would like to kick off because this book in a sense has been a long time coming, not from you but in Australia and I really wish I would have written it first, which is a compliment. Right. It's definitely a compliment. Right. Right. I could say the same thing about you, Gabby. Yeah. Why this book, why now, because the context for thinking about Asian Australians like me with my background is not sort of front and centre in some ways, notwithstanding the Gladys Lew debate at the moment, but the latest immigration group to really be in the public space has been the Muslim community. So why this book and why now? I think the answer to that is pretty personal, Gab. So the impetus from this book came from my kids getting a little bit older and I was doing the dad things that my dad did with me when I was a kid. I grew up in country Queensland and my father sort of passed on the family folklore and the who we were type conversations on these long road trips through Western Queensland. He'd say, you know, your great grandfather did this and then your uncle did that and that's sort of the way we did the family history. I was starting to do that with my kids. The problem was is that my kids are Eurasian Australian. My wife's a migrant from Hong Kong and my ancestors didn't really want them to be a part of the nation that they were building. My great, great, great, great grandfather, Charles Nantes, was a member of the anti-Chinese leagues in Geelong that triggered the walk from Rome. So it triggered the poll tax that blocked Chinese migrants from coming into Australia. I was driving through Ararat with my son where there's now the Gomsung Chinese Heritage Museum and it was telling that story of the walk from Rome and I thought this is an interesting thread to pull on. Why my ancestors didn't want my present-day family to be a part of the country that they were building. And so how is that personal perspective from your family, what your family is now, how has that changed the way that you think about this issue? Yeah, so I grew up with a sort of a really unalloyed love of Australia. I just thought we were the country that had got it right. We were halfway between the Yanks, halfway between the Poms. The social hierarchies didn't matter. We were tackling the economic inequalities. I sort of laugh at the rest of the world for not knowing how good they could have it. And sort of after I got married and saw the country that my kids were growing up in, I sort of started to appreciate that their experience of Australia would be different to mine. And that started making me think about, well, what kind of country did my ancestors build and what kind of country could I be building for my kids? So those Australian values of mateship, egalitarianism, fair go, irreverence, I think they're still really powerful values. The reality is, though, is that they've been denied to many people in our country over time and in a time where Asian Australians now comprise, depending how you measure it, somewhere between 12, 13% of the population, bigger than the African American community in the US, forecast to reach the size of the Hispanic community in the US. We really want to have a conversation about the way that that community has been treated in our national story. Can I burst in briefly and just say, you said, Tim, that you've learned that the way your kids will experience Australia is different to the way you experienced Australia growing up. Did you know that before you got married and had children? Was that something that you understood or was this something that revealed itself to you through your lived experience? It's interesting. I think I probably would have known about it at an intellectual level, but Tim Supomaso and the former race discrimination commissioner who's written at length about this and is, I think, probably the preeminent expert in the data of the bamboo ceiling in Australia, the differential treatment of Asian Australians in leadership positions. He phrases it as the advocates on this issue now have skin in the game. I just really do feel that around my kids. The idea that they could grow up with a different relationship to the country that I did, not being able to love Australia in the same way that I did in an uncomplicated way in the past and in a more complicated way today. That was an itch in the back of my mind. Just before we get to the history of Australia and the white Australia policy, you had a very visible experience watching Sam Dastyari be essentially personally attacked in a bar, verbally attacked and called, I think, a monkey. You stepped in and I think one of the comments that you made was what race is dickhead, which may have become a t-shirt. I don't know. It remains a very good line. Must be said. Not pre-workshop, I should point out. So you described the physical feeling that you felt at the time that that happened as I think a heart pumping and adrenaline riddled moment, not in a good way, which I think a lot of people who have been subject to racial attacks feel as well. I've felt that myself. Just talk me through that. Did you expect that? Well, I didn't expect to be dealing with fascists in my political career, if you're asking that. I think that's a new development in the political landscape in Australia. I think part of the dynamic of that event, so this happened at a pub in my electorate in Footscray. Footscray is a very diverse part of Australia. Two-thirds of my constituents born overseas or their parents born overseas. At that pub, the two bartenders were Asian Australian. My staff member who was with me then was Asian Australian. Sam obviously was not an Anglo. And then you had these three big burly Anglo guys come in with every cliche under the sun, go back to where you came from, you're a terrorist, a whole box and dice. And I think sort of weighing up being the only non-fascist Anglo in the room, it sort of felt like the impetus for action was on me there. And yeah, I do get a sense of that calculation you have to make of like, are these people just stupid bigots or are they stupid bigots who are also dangerous? Is this situation going to devolve into actual violence? And what happens then? Yeah, like it is a visceral experience and it was a tiny insight for me into an experience that many of my friends who are people of colour have experienced many times in their life. Yeah, I mean, I'll say it's possibly the whitest person in this conversation. I mean, it's not a competition, but I think I've won. The thing is, you do, that's why I asked you about, did you know prior to your marriage? I mean, I know obviously you're a highly intelligent person who knew at an intellectual level. I tell you what, like, spend any time, you mentioned Tim's suit, Pommesanne a minute ago, spend any time if you happen to be tagged in a Twitter conversation with him or with Penny Wong for that matter, spend any time in that slipstream and all of a sudden a sewer opens. It really does, that you don't encounter. You just don't. You know it exists, but you don't encounter it. And that's why I asked you the question, not to, you know, sort of ask an invasive personal question, but it's just, I know myself, I mean, I know intellectually racism exists, but it's like when I'm in the slipstream of Tim or Penny, it's like, oh my God. It's like, I don't know that people necessarily understand that unless they have stood next to a person either figuratively or literally in the sort of situation you describe. So anyway, just a comment from the corner. History, white Australia policy, we haven't got time obviously to go through the whole lot, but the book charts, the amazing history, the slide to the white Australia policy, the amazing story of the Australian diplomat Robert Lorry in the 1960s with a lamp over his shoulder at an overseas posting so he could highlight what colour skin the people were that he was interviewing on the Pantone chart and decide whether they were European looking enough. All the way to Billor Wheeler, the case of Billor Wheeler where the family, you know, has been ripped out of a community that they have really been embedded in. What do you think is behind that kind of single-minded, you know, eye-dotting, T-crossing place that a lot of our immigration policy has been like in the past and continues to be in some sectors today? Yeah, I mean Australia is not alone in having a tortured relationship with race as a colonial society, you know, America, Canada, New Zealand, they've all had racially exclusionary immigration laws. Our bad luck however was for that rise in racially exclusionary thinking and lawmaking to happen at our moment of federation, at our, when we were working out what it meant to be Australian. So those early Australian colonists like my ancestors, they really and quite explicitly defined what it meant to be Australian in explicit contrast with their stereotypes of what they thought Asia was and particularly Chinese people. So they wanted to sort of define that the boundaries of Australian identity as, you know, independent, egalitarian and irreverent and, you know, practical and enduring in the face of the natural environment. So they constructed this view of the sort of the Chinese other that was the opposite to all of that. And that really fed into all of our institution building and symbol building for more than 100 years. You know, the white Australia policy changed our demography but the thinking that fed into the white Australia policy really shaped our institutions for more than a century. And so today where this nation of contradictions is two Australians, and it's a point that really jumped off the page on reading your book, because you make this point as well. And I think there is an enormous disconnect between the Australia of our general community. So the lived experience of Australian society today and the Australia of our national imaginings and our institutions, which does not reflect and represent the Australia of today in any form today. I mean, our political discourse, our media coverage, it's more reactionary, more insular than the lived experience in our community. It's a real issue. And in a way, it's an artificial construct, because as all of us are storytellers here, and you describe a lot of stories, you know, Billie Singh, the sniper, who was very much decorated and part of the Anzac legend, but you wouldn't see a Chinese face as a part of the Anzac legend. And part of your plea in the book is to go back and think about these commonalities of the values that we hold dear as so-called Australian and retell the Australian story with a more diverse face. Is that fair? Absolutely. I mean, Chinese Australians didn't deny those Australian values when they arrived. There wasn't anything intrinsic to them that was incompatible with that Australian identity that was trying to be built then. We denied those values to them. We denied that egalitarianism, that mateship to them. And Billie Singh is the paradigm example of this. I mean, this book is a walking epitome of, you know, Russell Ward's Australian legend. You know, he was an opening fast bowler for the Prosepine Cricket Club. He was a drover. He was a shooter. He could shoot the tail of a piglet from 100 yards. He was a joker. And at Gallipoli, he was one of our most decorated Anzacs. In fact, he still holds the record in the ADF for the most individual kills by a sniper, as macabre as that metric is. But he's missing from the Anzac story because Charles Bean, you know, the great historian of Anzac who wrote the literal history of Anzac, a 12-volume thousands of page story, that mentions 8,000 soldiers by name and is distinctive for telling the story of Gallipoli, not from the perspective of the generals or the tacticians, but from the individual soldiers there. You know, like Bill Brown from Ballarat is a boilermaker. In this battle, he did this. And part of why he did this was because that was how he was raised on the land. Despite all that, Singh doesn't get a mention in the official histories. He gets a footnote to a picture. And we now know that the reason for that is because Bean was suffused in this white Australia thinking. And, you know, he was someone that genuinely believed he had an obligation to fight for white Australia. In the official histories, he writes that Australia was at risk of racial suicide if we didn't maintain the white Australia policy, that it was the only thing that united the Anzacs that was brought around for Australia was to fight for a white Australia. We have forgotten all of this because that's not who we are now. We've outgrown that. But we can't understand, if we deny our history, we can't understand the way we've grown to be the country we are today. Denying that history denies our ability to grow. Really, I think it denies the greatest achievement of Australia over the last century, which is outgrowing those beginnings. Modern history, you can't get away from John Winston Howard and the contradiction that you point out in the book and has been pointed out in the past around how he, on the one hand, had this history and talked about in the 80s. Maybe we should pull back from some of the Asian migration to also presiding over the largest intake, essentially the policy decisions that made your electorate as diverse as it is today. How do you think about him? You talk about him as stifling any discussion on race and identity in Australia, even amongst progressives. Just talk me through that. Yeah, so Howard's another sort of personal story because when Howard was talking about too many Asians coming to Australia, that's when my wife arrived in the country. He was talking about her. He was wrong. He's been proven to be wrong in spades. But that did add a sort of a personal edge to this. The contradiction, the irony that you talk about is that Howard was the first prime minister to really turn the dial up on the volume of immigration. He made a series of changes to our immigration system that I can go into if you want. The point is, it's the first boom of migration since the end of the White Australia policy. So while Whitlam got rid of it, under Hawk Keating, migration levels were fairly low. So we only saw the practical change in the diversity of our population happen as a result of Howard. Now, the irony is that in the context of 100 years of nation building through that prism of White Australia, this is a significant thing. But Howard broke our ability to talk about it as a nation. He once said, as a trekked quote, I know what an Australian is and always will be. And he wasn't talking about Indigenous Australians. He had this view that Australian identity was carved in stone by Sir Henry Parks and passed on down to us via Charles Bean and Donald Bradman. But with 100 years of defining Australian identity through the exclusion of Asian Australians, we have to talk about what it means to be Australian again today, redefine those national symbols, that iconography of what it means to be Australian, because we've got a problem with representation in this country. It's almost like Australian multiculturalism works fantastically at the community level. Outcomes of migrants in employment, in education, in health are better than in the US and Canada than in UK peer countries. But the moment we're asked to imagine an Asian Australian as a representative of us, it breaks down. So our representative figures in leadership and our institutions are at half and a third of the level of Canada, the UK and America. In our parliament, we have four, maybe five Asian Australians, depending on how you count that. Proportionate to our population, we should have more than 30. The argument is always that there's a generational lag, that eventually that will catch up. Do you buy that? Well, that's something that a lot of the Asian Australians that I spoke with argued themselves, actually. So there is a view from some people that this will eventually fix itself. But we should be clear, the Hong Kong Chinese Australian community has been here since the 80s. The Vietnamese community has been here since the late 70s, early 80s. There's a new generation, like a second generation of kids from those communities, who is now demanding inclusion, demanding equality in these institutions, and it's not happening. We are clearly shit at it. I mean, let's be honest. I mean, we've got to a stage where we're only just now reaching a group of Indigenous representatives in our parliament. You talk about Chinese Australians being an established ethnic group in this country because they've been here for decades. I mean, crikey. We're only just working out how to do Indigenous representation and not even well, let alone trying to catch up on successive waves of migrants and their appearance in the parliament. But what do you think about it, Tim, though? Is it a combination of factors? Is it that we are just shit at this stuff that, as you say in the book, I think very eloquently that there's a gap between what the community looks like and what representative bodies in Australia look like? Is that because representative bodies are just shit and intrinsically hostile to newcomers? Or is there a reluctance on the part of ethnic groups or Indigenous people or whatever to step into the cauldron that we inhabit? Can I just cut in there as well, that reluctance? I feel like there's a real reluctance there. And when I was told as a young Chinese reporter, when I reported about a story on crime in the Chinese community, one of the Chinese elders said to me, we don't pull our shirt up and show our belly. And then just so on Murph's point, also add to it the split in the two-generational migrants where my father's generation was very quiet, head down bummer worked to a different type of migrant coming in, but also the second generations, like the Benjamin Laws, who's quite happy to say, you know, F off, like I am here and I am proud. And I see that as a real split in the community. Yeah, I mean, I think that the honest answer is there are multiple factors driving this. Some of it is sort of a demand side thing from the Asian-Australian community. But that's a much less significant issue in the second generation than it was in previous generations. Some of it might be the way our democratic institutions are structured that is different to the US-UK. Like, we don't do racial segregation geographically in the same way that they do. And that might flow through to democratic representation in some ways. But I think the thing that bells the cat that this is a broader issue is that it's across every institution in Australia. Like believe it or not, our parliament is one of the better performers in Asian-Australian representation. So somewhere between 12 and 13 percent of the community, it's between one and three percent of leaders across parliament, our ministry, our corporate Australia such boards and C-suites, our universities and our public service, which is worst of all. Now those are institutions that aren't affected by democratic structures. It is certainly intrinsic to us. And my hypothesis, I don't have, you know, hard evidence linking this, but just the way that I feel that this is working is that the Australian legend, you know, that that symbology, that idea that what it was to be Australian was to be a white man on the land was just so powerful in our Australian identity. It shaped everything. And we haven't had a more powerful symbol, a more powerful iconography come to replace it. Now some people say, oh, well, it's multiculturalism. You know, it's a civic democracy. That's what unites us. You know, like our belief in democracy and our belief in multiculturalism. That just doesn't have the guts to unite a country. You know, we can't be a nation of different respecters. Like that doesn't bring people together. I mean, I do believe that cultural things that link us together are important. I think they're out there. But we've got to start taking national identity and nation building at the symbolic level seriously again. And we haven't done that since Howard because the progressive side of politics was burnt by the culture wars on race and identity. And we've sort of shied away from it for 20 years now and we've had 20 years of very high migration rates, diversifying population. We've never really spoken about it. There's obviously a moral reason to do it, but there's an economic reason too, isn't there? Because you talk about Australia being at the fork of the road now and a lot of countries competing for very highly skilled migrants. And people are thinking twice about Australia now. And I love that Chinese program, the China's Thousand Talents Plan, which is a very Chinese label to get, essentially get overseas students come back to China to grab those skills. And it's had a significant effect on the number of students going back to China because they see opportunity there. Yeah, they used to be referred to as seaweed, the Chinese students going out because they'd stay and now they see turtles, they come back. But I mean, the reason that I called the book the Golden Country though was because it's fundamentally an optimistic book. You know, like we do a hell of a lot right in this country and a hell of a lot better than any other country in the world. I am one of these people that believes that we are the most successful multicultural country in the world. And I get that people roll their eyes at that now. But just on the evidence of survey results and migrant outcomes on community attitudes, it's pretty unambiguous. So there's a positive story to tell that. And if we could utilize the talents within our own nation, you know, at the cusp of the Asian century, at the edge of a region that is the center of the geostrategic contests of our time, the center of economic growth of our time. And if we could combine this incredibly diverse, talented young population with the open liberal society and institutions that we have, we'd be in the box seat in this nation. So I have a very optimistic view of that. But we've got to start doing things differently from the way we've done it for the last 20 years. It's already been on cruise control for the last 20 years and we've forgotten what has made Australian migration so successful. You know, our settlement programs used to be world leading. You know, in the last 10 years in particular, they've become securitized. We think about immigration in terms of border protection, about how we're keeping people out of this country instead of in terms of citizenship and nation building, which is how we're using migration to build this country, to shape this country. We've only got a couple of minutes left, guys. We need to do Gladys Liu, I reckon. Yes, we certainly do. So how do you, what do you say about Chinese Australians or Asian Australians who are thinking about a career in politics and see what's playing out around Gladys Liu, which is not to say that the processes haven't gone wrong and, you know, she's made some pretty interesting decisions. Interventions. Interventions. What do you make of that? Because on the one hand, you know, there are serious questions to answer. On the other, as a Chinese Australian, I think, hmm, there's a little too much glee around some of the comments that are being made right now. Yeah, so the day after the Gladys Liu stuff broke in parliament, I was at the Asian Australian Leadership Summit, which is incredibly inspiring couple of days organised by ANU, PwC and Agilink, hundreds of Asian Australian leaders coming together to talk about these bamboo ceiling issues like their place in Australia. And there was a lot of talk about this issue. There's a lot of anxiety. People do not enjoy being in the gun of the Australian political debate. No one enjoys that, let alone a whole community. I argue very strongly, it's not Labor who put that community in the gun. It was the Prime Minister who I think very irresponsibly and very foolishly conflating issues of individual conduct with structural racism faced by a community. These are both legitimate issues, but they're separate in this context. The reality is Australia just has to get better at dealing with these issues. They're not going away. Historical racism in Australia will be with us for a while. The threat of foreign interference will be with us for a while. We have to be able to talk about both of these issues without conflating them and damaging our approach to the other one. And I think back on the last week in parliament and think, how different would that debate have been if we had had 30 Asian Australians across the House of Reps in the Senate? If we had had 20 plus Asian Australians in the press gallery? If our democratic institutions looked like our community, how differently would that have played out? It wouldn't have been a question like a referendum on Gladys Liu as the representative of the Australian Chinese community, because there would have been a dozen other representatives there saying, with the completely different perspective on things, the narrowness of our representations increases the stakes of this in a way that's very unfair. Now, Gladys Liu should not have to be the representative of the Australian Chinese community, and that was extremely foolish and unfair for the Prime Minister to make a one. Well, you know, judging from this conversation that you need to go and get a copy of this book. So we, both Gabby and I, encourage you to do that. It's a very good read. You should have a look at it. Thank you so much for coming on the show, Tim. We appreciate it. Thank you to Miles Martin Yoni and Hannah Isard for production as always. You know the drill. Leave ratings, reviews, tell all your friends. This is slightly strange in terms of sequencing. As you're listening to this, I will be in America. But I will be back next week with tales of Donald Trump and Scott Morrison and other intriguing things. So then, be well.