 This is The Guardian. The New South Wales average mortgage now is $800,000, which... Oh, my God, really? Yes. You only have to add like a full percentage point and you are paying $1,000 a month extra. And the market is currently pricing in three percentage points in a year. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. We're on the other side of the election and you're on Australian politics. I'm Catherine Murphy and with me are my two favourite Gen X jokers. Who else could they be? Wow. Labelled. I know. So millennial. Haven't even introduced you yet. I have Shane Wright from the nine newspapers, senior economic. Well, we do this every episode. But my job yesterday was to explain to somebody about Tony Basil and Louis Rethridge. But I will save these for next from later on. Don't pick too early. I won't pick early, but they were Shane Wright writes about the economy for the nine for the nine newspapers. That is that is his job. Went forced to Greg Jericho, wonderful Greg Jericho from Guardian Australia. And these days also with the Australia Institute, where he has a sort of proper job. Yes. Yes. Good Lord. To wear a flag on your back saying because it's the Australia Institute. No, I'm just wondering. I think you're misunderstanding the the kind of organisation. No, it's not first Australia Institute. It's the Australia Institute. It's sort of like, you know, how Canadians that will have Americans wear patches about it. Well, let's let's not divert. OK, so look, I'm sorry. This is a chaotic opening, even more than usual. If you are an Australian politics regular, you will know that Shane and Greg and I get together to talk about the economy periodically, mostly because every sort of six weeks or so I say, oh, my God, I've lost the threat of the economy. I need to bring the mates in. So cross stitching and just. So anyway, we come together, we talk about the economy. But when we're actually not going to start there, we're going to get there. So you promise and then undelivered. God, seriously. No placement. This is this seriously is the most chaotic episode we've ever done. Anyway, and we're only two minutes in. We are getting to the economy, but first of all, I mentioned when I said hello that we are on the other side of the election. I just knowing that everybody listening to this show followed the election very closely and a very interesting outcome. I'm going to start there. Shane, did we get the result on Saturday night that you expected? Well, in our betting market, I had UAP at 86, but I did have a but I did have a second option, which was labor somewhere between 76, 78, which is pretty accurate. Yeah. But because I actually did think the teals would would make ground. I did warn a fellow reporter who was talking about, say, Josh Frydenberg and said, Oh, do you think that he can he'll go? I said, if there is a swing on a good local member, yeah, good luck. It's a lot of people talk about we'll go. And then that's what happens. And over all the years and you and I have got look, we measured in Methuselah years here that there are a lot of good MPs who have lost their seats over elections going back to the start. That's just what happens. And ones who shouldn't get reelected do get elected. But we reflect poorly on those photos in those seats. But so that so the teal surprise didn't surprise. And what went on in Western Australia didn't surprise me. Did you think it'd be at that level for seats for no tangy? Look, tangy had been talked about and more. So there's something because my former life right. Yes. Yes. Yes. We had picked up that there was something going on in Tangy and the local liberal MP Ben Morton decided to spend all his time. I know it's just extraordinary. And the feedback from the West Australian libs is he didn't he thought he had it. And there's your first mistake is just underestimating your opposition. The opposition, Sam Lim, part from being a dolphin trainer, which is still the best. It's the best. Yeah, it is. We've never had a dolphin trainer. How many languages? Well, someone explained to me. He speaks 10 human languages and dolphin and fluid dolphin. And fluid dolphin. So this is a guy who apparently wore out five pairs of shoes, door knocking. But his job before running for parliament was as a covert police, but explain to people in different languages what's going on around Covid. So that's that's his stomping ground. So he was in the face of everyone in Tangy. Tangy, for those who aren't from W.A., it is it's a bit like Higgins. Beautiful spot on the Swan River on the southern side of the river. That area had swung really heavily to Mark McGow at the last election. So you go like it's believable. And like Moore, which was a really safe seat as well. Northern suburbs of Perth, it's partly the Bible Belt. It takes in the Bible Belt of where there's two Bible Belts in Perth. This is the more conservative, more upmarket one. Huge swing there as well. And you look there are big falls. So what happened in Perth? Not a surprise. Surprise. You think Boothby. Yep. And so that actually got you very quickly into the mid 70s for labor. And what happened to the Liberal Party? Just no appearance, your worship. Yeah. Yeah. Just just quickly before I throw to Greg, I just explain just in case you don't know who Ben Morton is, I reckon most people listening will. But just in case you don't know who he is, he was a liberal minister and he was former West Australian State Secretary. State Secretary who had overseen a very large election victory. Yes, indeed. And very close to Scott Morrison. In fact, disconcertingly physically similar to Scott Morrison. Yeah, not dissimilar. Very quite. Anyway, Ben spent the entire campaign on the plane with Scott Morrison and lost his seat. Greg, what do you think about Saturday night? I can't say I was predicting it to the accuracy of Shane. I knew all along South Australia and Western Australia were going to be bad. Just from friends back home in South Australia were, you know, the vibe was pretty still pretty good after the election. And you just knew Western Australia was going to be a horror show. And that was pretty clear by the fact that Scott Morrison was there on the last day of the campaign, which no liberal leader ever wants to be in Western Australia on the last day of the campaign. It's a long way from anywhere, anywhere. Which was a pretty bad sign. And it was a case of I think like a lot of people had a bit of 2019 PTSD where I just didn't trust myself for perhaps as much as I should have because I thought it was a terrible campaign for the Liberal Party. I thought they were reactive most of the time, even if it was reacting to gaffes such as they were by Albanese. It was always a reaction. And I thought it just went to complete futs. In two or three weeks out when he started arguing for a real wage cut for those on minimum wage, regardless of whether you think it's inflationary or not, that was just an extraordinary thing for someone to be arguing and also suggesting regarding ICAC that, hey, maybe more corruption is not that bad, you know. And then to top it all off, when he as soon as he came out and said, hey, I'm I can change that was just warning signs. You don't say that if things are going well internally with the polling. And so with a few days to go, you know, a lot of people, of course, for asking me about it, thinking I have some inner knowledge. And I pretty much my only comment was if Labour can't win it from here, they might as well disband and start a new party because everything seemed to be pointing for a win. But I didn't expect as many independents. I was I was certainly thinking Goldstein and Ku Yong and probably Wentworth, but I didn't see what's the Michaela? Michaela. Michaela. I didn't see that happening in a few. Yeah. And certainly I had had people talking about the Greens up in Brisbane because I do have a few friends in the Greens party and they were very bullish about it. But I was kind of wondering if it's a little bit like in South Australia with the seat of state that Labor always keeps saying, well, a chance to win. And it always seems to be, well, they were a chance, but they don't quite get there. But heck, they're all getting close to it now. So I wasn't shocked, but I was not calm in my sort of views of what the result was going to be that that night. Because, you know, I think just 2019 blinded me, although I think we all forgotten that 2019, even the polls were closer than they were this time. And we actually wasn't that much of a shock if you actually were paying attention, as I know if you were, you were sort of putting out the word that things are going pretty bad. And whereas this time, all the pretty bad things were on the liberal side, I thought I thought it was just a horror campaign for them. Hmm. It's interesting, isn't it? OK, so we need to get to the economy, which is still with us. And because I just haven't had these guys on for a while, really, which is unusual for us just because we've been so focused on the campaign and unloved, unloved. Did it cancelled? That's right. Cancel. I can't get to talk or get my word across to anyone. Oh, my God. Anyway, yes, the economy. Let's talk about it because, you know, it's it's a bit of a thing. I think it's fair to say the economy is a bit of a thing. Greg touched a bit on it, which was the I agree with him. The the wages thing, I think was really important because and I think the political reporters, particularly at my end of the gallery, didn't see it the same way as going, oh, this is unbelievable, not understanding that the Fair Work Commission, for instance, has given above above inflation, wage rises over the last three years and inflation hasn't broken out. Yeah. And yeah, it's pretty some of the analysis, some of the analysis was pretty circa 1985 to 2000 in terms of the mindset. Yeah, that's right. I agree. And even 1923, Jim. See, we know that we have the benefit. We're coming back to Shane. Don't lose your thought. I haven't lost it. You know, we we have if you're a regular listener, you'll know the three of us because of our age have have struggled through the low inflation period. Right. This is cognitive dissonance. Right. So it's sort of perhaps we were, you know, perhaps we were better armed for, you know, the fact the world's moved than perhaps some others who, you know, not dipping in as frequently anyway, Shane finishes. Yeah. Yeah. So you you got to that point of arguing. Right. The way that Morrison went so hard. Now, I'm going to say at the start in my first week back in the office from January break, I wrote a piece saying this is at a cost of living election. Yeah. And everything is through that lens that like the RBA and Treasury have underestimated what was going on in terms of inflation. And you but you could see that in the figures of everything that was coming through that there's a lot of money around and people are buying but they're having to pay more. Yeah. And I think it helps us being the regular grocery shopper in our house. True. To know what's going on. That's true. So that my starting point for this whole election campaign has been is a cost of living. And you can see, say, Morrison talk. He always talked about, say, the price of electricity, which was the one thing good on him could talk about. Yep. The price of electricity has come down. The problem is electricity is not the only thing that people buy. Yes. And they don't buy it as regularly as they're buying their bread, their milk. The price of beef has gone up 20 percent in the last two or three years because of what's going on in there. Sorry for the vegan listeners amongst the Guardian crowd. Vegetables and fruit have also. Fruit and vegetables have also gone. So that was my starting point. And so you get to this point two or three weeks into the campaign where one person says, I think wages should rise in line with inflation, not startling by itself, but somehow was from the political chattering class. It was, oh, my God, this is outrageous. I'm mad at ignoring what was had previously gone on. And then Morrison went into that in a really hard way. And then you could see within days was having to backtrack. So there's that. And of course, what so there's that the inflation figures which came out, which just just confirmed what everyone's feeling. Hmm. Might have been surprised to Macquarie Street, Martin Place and also to Treasury, but I wasn't so surprised to anybody in the real world. RBA, which has been trying to put off, it did not want to lift your interest rates from the campaign campaign. Gets that figure. It sees what's going on around the world. It says, oh, my Lord, guys, girls, we've got to go. And so like we have been talking, there's been all this chatter about right interest rates, extraordinarily low, fantastic. No big stretch to the economy, except everyone's leverage and the iron ball, their dog, cat and goldfish to pay to get into a house. And that's where you've had a two, I think it's a two or three two hundred thousand dollar increase in the average mortgage. Yeah. In New South Wales in two years. Yeah. So point one on two hundred thousand adds up to real dollars and cents pretty quickly. Yeah. So you had that. And then you kept it off with the wage starter that came out in the last week. And the government had always been focused on the unemployment figure. And it undeniably good. If you believe that the the ABS is mixing up figures and unemployment is not like go out and have a look like honestly, every cafe is struggling to find. Yeah, businesses closing because they can't start, you know, all the hours. And the Twitter out here who says, oh, well, one hour of work. And you go, I got into a fight saying, sorry, we think there's a one in one thousand Australians qualify under that definition. It's been the definition for for employment for about 45, 50 years. Yeah, that's not fiddling the numbers. Unemployment is really, really low. You could just look at the number of job ads that are out. They are at record levels as well. So the government focused on that. Absolutely right to do so. But the problem was the day before the what people are getting paid for those jobs is the issue. Yes. And I think that's there is a reason why I don't. Trudeau, Biden, Macron had the same problems. Boris has the same problems. Is that inflation in wages around the world, if they're in the wrong, the wrong way. Yeah. Never good for an incumbent. No, I guess Scott Morrison was the incumbent when you've got inflation running far, far, faster than wages. Yeah. OK, so that's set the scene beautifully. I try. Greg, why don't we start by thinking about what the new Labor government may be able to do about any of these things? Oh, can I go back and set the scene and get the hard question? It's it is really going to be tough. And by the time this comes out, readers will be able to read my article on sort of all the massive unusual problems that the government is facing because every government always faces economic problems. But these ones are are unusual. We talk about and this goes to things like the unemployment rate and businesses struggling. You know, we've got fewer people in the labor force age 15 to 34 than we did at the start of the pandemic. That was one of your best ever graphs. Yes, really impressed with that. Thank you. Well done. Yes. And it's something that it's going to lead to a lower unemployment rate. But it's not it's kind of in a sense an unemployment rate that is perhaps lower than it would be, purely because of a mathematical equation where you've got the denominator being lower than it normally would be. And it's something that's going to have to increase and will increase as the borders open and that's going to have an impact on the unemployment rate, maybe increasing it, which it's going to be this weird thing for the government to have to deal with of, oh, we're actually getting back to kind of more normally. And yet it seems like if we're just looking at the unemployment rate as being perfectly the same as measuring the same things week in, month in, month out, it looks like things are getting worse. And yet that mightn't be reflective. The cost of living is another thing that's really tough because so much of it is coming from overseas. So much of it is due to huge increases in prices and things, you know, things that we probably don't really care about because we don't actually purchase them ourselves. Things like urea, which goes into fertilizer and as we produce... Well, we produce a lot of urea. We do, we sadly do it and we take a lot of it. But, you know, that has increased, Astrand doubled, you know, in a few months and purely because of what's happening in Ukraine. America, the consumption of goods in America, of durable goods, is off the charts compared to what you'd expect it to be. And that's increasing supply constraints and why you can't get stuff in from overseas and why you're having to pay more for things like cars even. All of these things are going to be tough to deal with and they're not going to be helped much or at least reduced much by an interest rate rise. But an interest rate rise is going to have an impact on inflation because it will have an impact on domestic demand, on our ability to do things. Purely because, as Shane was talking about with mortgages, one of the problems with monetary policy is reducing it. It does help, it does get more money out in the economy, but a lot of people just keep their mortgage rates the same and just kind of take the bonus of getting more interest paid off. But when interest rates rise, you can't sort of say, oh, I'll pay you back later, Bank. No, you've got to raise him out and there's a finite amount of money you have got, especially if wages are flat. And that means you spend less elsewhere. I just came back from a press conference with Jim Chalmers where he did channel Michael Stipe in REM, where he said, everybody's going to hurt. Oh, hang on, hang on. I just want to record this for the record, that we got 19 minutes in. And I went to the 90s. And you went to the 90s? That's true. Automatic for the people in the early 90s. Anyway, sorry, REM, love. But he did say, yeah, those interest rate rises. And he wasn't afraid to say the RBA is saying there's going to be more through the rest of the year, which is, that's exactly what they're saying. Those interest rates are going to build up fairly quickly. So if you are on the, which is what the New South Wales average mortgage now is, $800,000, which... Oh, my God, really? Yes. And that is frightening. So if you add, you only have to add like a full percentage point and you are paying $1,000 a month extra. And the market is currently pricing in three percentage points in a year increase, which I don't think will happen, because we would have a recession. So you won't need to raise it because the economy would be dead. But it makes that point about how finally calibrating or how difficult it is to calibrate these things. And so 1991 recession was partly, was largely driven by the Reserve Bank here taking interest rates to $7.5. Go back to the US recession of 1981, Paul Volcker took interest rates well above 10%, about 15% in the US caused a recession. Central banks do a great job in avoiding depressions. And we don't talk about depressions like we did pre-World War II. We just, we don't get them. But we do get recessions. We have financial crises these days. Another part of its, another world, that one, the financial crisis, that then a normal run of the mill recession. We don't normally get them. But central banks contributed to them because their job is to keep inflation at bay. And the only way they do it, lift interest rates. They're not even just lifting interest rates. They're going to be involved in quantitative tightening. Yes. I love how you knowingly nodded there. No, no, no. Well, we've been easing. We've been easing for yonks. And now we have to go in the other direction. That's right. So that these are the, Greg is absolutely right talking about, like, this is an unusual situation. And the other unusual situation is we're running a whopping big deficit. Huge deficit. Huge deficit. Apart from the crazies who talk to me about one hour unemployment, there's the other type, the MMT types, who have gone absolutely quiet when, like now, the MMT theory is what we should be increasing taxes to deal with inflation. Hold on. Haven't heard that one since the inflation got over 5%. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway. Yeah. Well, we're back sort of, you know, we're sort of back to the, back to conditions that strangely, while the pressing are more recognisable to me than this period of- But it's also, I think it's, you know, we think of the 1990s one. I mean, we don't have a situation of, I mean, that was certainly trying to decrease an asset boom, a massive asset price. But it almost killed Westpac. Yeah. But we've got a situation where, you know, unemployment, low inflation, okay, it's 5.1% probably will go up. But even with that, there is this sense that, you know, it might not be an ongoing level of funding and it'll come back down. And so it's a case of, it really is going to be tricky times ahead for the government in terms of how much they're going to be spending and putting out into the economy and also the Reserve Bank in terms of calibrating, because one of the problems in this, where I do have a bit of sympathy for the Reserve Bank is, it is often one of those things where they'll raise interest rates and nothing seems to happen. They raise a bit more, nothing seems to happen. And they raise them and everyone's like, oh, we've collapsed. Do you think, well, why didn't you stop two interest rate rises? And it's like, because you weren't, nothing had changed yet. And it's very hard to stop before the cliff. Like, obviously we listened to every word that everybody said during the election campaign, because sadly we are, that is our lot in life. Sad, sad. But, because like in my mind, obviously, I think Jim Chalmers, who is the new treasurer, sort of spoke throughout the election campaign, sort of mapping this in the broad, right? That we've got all these complicated dynamics to manage in the event that we get in. There's the deficit, there's inflation, there's cost of living, there's this, that, the other thing. Petrol excise, my God, can you imagine what's gonna happen when the petrol excise returns to normal? You know, right. Do you think- I'm more worried about the Lamington. Well, no, exactly. The Super Size Lamington, which is going to hit- The 3% tax cut, which it'll income earners. Which is gonna hit from July 1. Yeah, and that's a hell of a whack. That's inflationary by any measure. Yeah, exactly, right. But do you think the sort of voting public, well, I mean, look, this is the ultimate crystal ball. It's almost not even worth asking, but let's have some fun anyway. But you go ahead, go ahead. No, do you think they've laid the ground enough, I suppose? Or do you think that we'll sort of, you know, we'll get six months down the track to the October budget? And people will be going, hang on. Like we elected you people to give us higher wages and fix the cost of living crisis and all this sort of stuff. And you didn't tell us that it was all hard, even though they sort of pretty much did. What do we think about that? Tell me what the price of petrol will be. On September 29, which is the day after the excise comes off, it goes back up and you'll hear all the complaints about that. But I think that's one issue. The Fair Work Commission will have increased wages by then. Like that starts from July 1. So there will be some income for those at the bottom end and then they'll start feeding through. So that's another side of it. You get to the, let's say that period, inflation may have peaked. Although that, I'm not convinced, I'm a bit more hawkish than the good grog. I think inflation's more, there's a lot of inflation domestically. And there's the $260 billion that is sitting in people's bank accounts that they've saved through COVID. That does give them the wherewithal to spend up. It's interesting, the consumer confidence surveys that we've seen, and they were pointing also, they fell, both of them, the ANZ Weekly and the Westpac Monthly, they all fell really strongly through the election campaign and cost of living was the big issue for them in that space. But people spending is maintaining, it's still high. But it's attitude, and that's, I'm buying this, damn it, it's more expensive. So people have got the money to buy it, but they're just not happy with the price they're paying for it. So whether those sort of tensions have ameliorated by October, who knows? That's, it's a great unknown. And you could see it the way Chalmers and Katie Gallagher, the finance minister, are talking today, as every good economic team coming into office should do, lay the groundwork for, well, we've got to put the fiscal hair shirt on, we've got to be tough, and we've got to make some tough decisions. So you can see they've laying the groundwork that hockey and cormen did when they came to office. Or when Swan and Tanner came to office in 2007. Like, those guys actually cut spending. When they came to office, there were shouts from across the chamber, you're going to drive the country into recession, which they didn't. And you go back even further to Costello and Faye coming in in 96. Same thing. Like, that was Beasley's, like the budget black hole. Same thing. So that's what they're trying to do, whether that can resonate. And this goes back to the election. One of the most amazing things is that Jim Chalmers was out and about all through the campaign, not just when Albanese was in with COVID, where he was doing a lot, but he travelled around, he was speaking quite often. Poor old Josh Frydenberg, trapped in Kuyong. Yeah, entirely, entirely trapped in Kuyong. It's the name of a horror film, isn't it? Trapped in Kuyong or trapped in Kew. We love you, Kuyong, if you're listening, just by the way. But, you know, he was unable, like, he is a very good communicator. And he was unable to do that. Like, the fact that when they did their costing, Simon Birmingham had to fly from Canberra down to Melbourne to do it, rather than treasure coming here to do it. That was the sign how much trouble he was in, but it also muted him to a great extent. So focus then goes on to Morrison, which then makes it like, if people don't like him, that makes it more difficult to sell the entire government. Yeah, exactly. OK, well, we've only got a couple of minutes. What do we think about the October budget? What do we think about that? I think it's a few months off. LAUGHTER Nothing. I think... What do we think about that? Well, they've constrained themselves by locking in the stage three tax cards. Yes, OMG. I would have thought that if they... That would have been ripe, I would have thought, to at least delay and be able to sell that as, you know, until we can afford them. But it seems like that ship sailed. That ship has sailed. It is going to be tough. I don't think there's going to be much of a honeymoon for this government, basically, because, you know, it's not like the 2007 or 1983 or 1996 victory. It's a different victory. It's a different victory. They... I won't say they got there by default, but it was very much an anti-government victory. And as we've seen from, you know, even at state government levels, if you are not seen to be delivering, you can get turfed very quickly. Thank you, Campbell Newman. Yeah. So we'll require some clever talk, but also, I think, some honest talk. I don't think they're going to get the blame for interest rates, especially since we all know where they're going. But at a certain point, you take ownership of everything and that'll definitely be around October. Yeah. Your journey might be given six months' grace. People expect a Labour government to be... to deliver a Labour budget that has more spending on childcare, education... Education services and things like that. I think one thing that in turn... Shane's right, definitely right about the spending. What I think Chalmers and Gallagher would be absolutely hoping will occur is that we get the rebalance back to services spending that has not been there. All of our spending is just going to goods, durable goods, and we're not spending as much on services. You know, the number of jobs in accommodation and food and beverage service are lower than just about any other sort of segment of the economy compared to pre-pandemic periods. And that's purely because we're not back in that going out, going on holidays, going, doing things. We're not back to normal. We're still in the pandemic. And until that changes, it's going to be very hard to see inflation pressures come off because when you suddenly are spending... Instead of spending, you know, a third to 40% of your income on goods, you're spending 60% to 70%. That's causing an incredible amount of demand for goods... Stuff, tangible stuff. That is kind of unreal in a way because we're just not acting like we normally should or normally do. And until that changes back, which God knows when, but it's, you know, it's going to be very interesting. And, yeah, it's not going to be a return to surplus or anything in... Our lifetimes. No lifetimes. Yeah, no. I mean, this is the other thing. The other problem with the raising interest rates, as Shane points out, it generally causes a recession. And what do you do when a recession occurs? You crank out the spending, which, you know... Been there. Yeah. Interesting. What do you think, Shane? October budget, final thoughts? Looking forward to it. Other budgets. First lie of the podcast. First lie of the podcast. The Flying Pigs tie the Flying Pigs. That's true, actually. Shane has an overwhelming enthusiasm for budgets. That's true. But as I was explaining to my millennial new economics off-citer about Tony Basil... Oh, yes. Did you have to spell it out and say it's Tony Basil? Well, I said this was the issue. One, she didn't know who Tony Basil was. And I said, right, Mickey. I said one of the biggest selling... Yeah. Signal. Singles. Singles. One-hit-wonder school time. She said, oh, yeah. I said, right. But Tony Basil, I have her one and only album. Tony Basil is a great choreographer. Yeah. All the rest. Anyway, her first album, her only album, she also released a song called Time After Time. Now, anyone from the 80s will go, who? Cidilopa. Hang on. Completely different song. Oh, my gosh. Both Time After Time. Like, this is an early 80s electro-pop sort of thing. Yeah. With a lot of synth. But with a bit of Tony sensibility. Oh, my God. This is like right up my alley. It is right up your alley. I will send you a link to it later on. And Shane, when this pops on Saturday, this episode pops on Saturday, Shane will also send a link out into the world. I will. Yes. And then two years later, Cidilopa wins multiple Grammys with her. She's So Unusual album. Yes. And goes number one with Time After Time. Completely different songs. So we had a budget in March. Yeah, twenty nine. We did. March 29. The budget in October, same title. It'll say Federal Budget. She's So Unusual. 22-23. Very different. Very different. Like, this won't be electro-pop. This will be closer to the the ballad-y type version that Cindy made famous for us all. Yes. So I find it'll be really interesting because I know already Treasury has done is doing their briefings with the new treasurer and said, oh, some of the things that we were assuming back in March, at the start of March, when they were putting it together, like they have downgraded productivity growth, for instance. I do know that for a fact. Yeah. So that changes a lot of the numbers. But the attitude changes within Treasury because they've got right. We've got two new people, both of them actually know what they're on about because Katie Gallagher, former chief minister and Jim Chalmers worked in the Swan Treasury Office through GFC. So they actually got two people go right. They don't have to worry about the politics as much as the pre-election budget because it's filled with election. It was a three month budget. Three months for five minutes. Yeah. We put on a barbecue and it would taste great with applesauce. Yeah. This one will be very different. So the Tony Basil approach to the two budgets. Love it. Take that. Take that to the bank, people. And Shane will share that link on his socials on Saturday. I absolutely promise. Thank you to you both. You know, it's been too long. It has been. So thank you both. Whatever his name is. Sorry. I forgot. Who are you again? Sorry. No, no, it has been too long. Thank you to you guys for listening. I just reassure listeners, regulars that the Ask Us Anything format that we ran out for the entire election campaign, which became a mini sensation in some astonishment for us. We will continue those episodes as well as these chats, the long form interviews I do and other things. I want to reassure you that those episodes are not going away because we had a blast with them and clearly you guys did too. So that's sensational. Thank you, as always, to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of the show. Thank you to you guys for listening. You know what you need to do. Share a writer's review, all that business. We'll be back next week.