 This is The Guardian. You make the toughest decisions early and then wrangle your way back. You get to 23, 24, when's the next election? It's going to be early 25. OK, real wages are growing. The Reserve Bank will have started cutting interest rates by then. Yeah, you just got to ride it out. You've got to ride it out and make the best of it as you can. So that's why you've got Chalmers going so hard. The ashen face, the baton as the bad cop, thumping anything you can find. Hello, lovely people of podcasts. Welcome to the show. You are with Catherine Murphy and you are on Australian Politics and with me. Curiously silent. What are you looking at? Goodness gracious. We just wanted an introduction. Isn't that hard? You just wanted it to be professional. You wanted it to be professional. I am with Shane Wright, senior economics correspondent for nine newspapers, so economic guru. And also, shall we say, just sort of this could be the understatement of the century. A minor aficionado in the oeuvre of Kate Bush. I think Spotify said I was in the top point. Oh, 5% of listeners last year. So I'm just saying there'll be some economics in the next 30 minutes and some Kate Bush. Also with me in the pod cave, Greg Jericho, lovely Greg Jericho, man of charts and stats and other miscellaneous facts for Guardian Australia and these days also works for the Australia Institute, the Progressive Think Tank. So I want to start, of course, by thanking Greg for running up that hill. Running up that hill. And joining this important conversation today. Can't get don't peak too early. Don't peak too early, boys. So, look, we've gathered here today as we as we are want, because today, which I shouldn't actually be calling today, but it's Thursday. If you're interested, we're recording on Thursday. The reason we're here is if you follow politics closely, you will know that on Thursday, the new treasurer, Jim Chalmers, delivered an economic statement to parliament. This is his first ministerial statement as treasurer. It's the first ministerial statement by any member of the new government. That's yeah. Well, that's very first. Yeah, that's exactly right. It was. Yes, it definitely was. I hadn't thought of that. It's the first since Kate Bush went number one. There you go. See, you opened that. I did open that door. Yes, after we ran up that hill. I think there was a door open there. I think you just passed on through. Yeah. Anyway, back to the right on through to the other side. Yeah, back to the economy, back to the economy. Yes. So anyway, Jim Chalmers delivered a statement to the parliament, updating all of us voters on lookers about the state of the economy. And he delivered some massive signposts to the October budget. Shane, why don't you kick off and tell us, you know, broadly what Jim Chalmers said, just in case the good folks missed it. Things are tough. Things are going to get tougher. Don't smile. That's pretty close. So we went through right inflation will get to seven and three quarter percent by the end of the year, which would be higher since the start of 1990, which was about five months after Kate Bush released the album, The Central World. Thank you. Just thought of. No, no. Just to give you some context here. Important to give context. Perfectly appropriate. The higher interest rates that the Reserve Bank is using right now is going to lop off at least half a percentage point from growth for this current financial year and next financial year. Also notes net exports is going to drag on growth, as will the slowdown in construction and the supply problems in construction. As anyone who's trying to build a house, I mentioned from the dreaming, Kate Bush sang the song Get Out of My House. Nothing to do with the Australian building industry right now. But but but but but but thoughts and prayers if you are building a house right now. Absolutely. Yes. And also like unemployment around like, as we know, astonishingly good figures at the moment at three and a half percent. Treasury thinking it'll be average around three and three quarters this year and then tick up a little bit to four and stay around for the big one, of course, is wages that real wages are going backwards. Yeah. Big time like that. Actually, this is it. Nominal wages are wages are supposed to go up, but it's just an inflation is going up so much faster. So he's actually the Treasury forecast actually push back real wage growth by a full year until probably the middle of 2024. And and sort of budget. I mean, obviously that the the forecast impact the budget. That's the obvious one. Yes. So we say so he didn't give a lot away on the budget, but said, oh, doom and gloom. Those buggers over the other side. Look at all the money. Yes. But he touched on how the inflation generally and inflation and higher wages growth will probably cost expenditure an extra 30 billion over the next three and a bit years. And unpack that too for people who don't understand the right. So say the age pension, which is the largest welfare payment by the federal government, that is actually linked to inflation. Yes. And so if inflation picks up, then you have to start paying out more. And you actually saw this was one of the weird things just before the election. The previous government was saying, oh, look, pensions that you're going to have to get. I think it was a three and a half or four percent increase in the age pension. And that shows how good we're going. Yeah. No, it was a reflection of inflation. Exactly. That's all it was. So you've got those sorts of things. He teased a little bit about what's going on around some of the things that the ads it was capitalized in the speech. The rorts. Oh, yes. Yes. The rorts audit. The rorts audit is going saying, for instance, and we've heard a bit about this week about a register for businesses, the cost of which has gone from about 500 mil to one and a half billion dollars, which hadn't been put away in the budget. I don't want to detain us, but I struggle to get my head around that whole situation. I know. And it hasn't actually hasn't been explained in great detail. Well, I'm glad about that. I just wondered whether I was an idiot. No one. No one should ever accuse you of being an idiot. Well, no, but it was sort of was just one of those things where I just thought, I can't really understand that anyway. Sorry, Shana. No. And so that's and then we got to the to the rhetoric of, look, we understand like we're going to like everyone around the country is tightening their belts. We will tighten our belts. But of course, the belt tightening, we won't really see until the October budget. Yes, exactly. Nicely done. Now, Greg, did any of that sort of makes sense? No. If you say it all again, but clearer this time for everybody who was listening. They fell asleep. But turn on the CD player. Let us roll. No, no. Let us roll and fall in green. Greg, Greg, any of that surprise you? First question. So any anything surprising there, but anything sort of terrify you about that whole situation? No, not a lot of surprises. And just looking at what other economists sort of commercial economists for banks and things, everyone seemed to be fairly on board with all the predictions that it was about what they were expecting. Obviously, rising inflation rates and they are going up fast, as everyone knows, and predicted to keep going up fast. I still think going up predicted to go up faster than they actually will. But who knows? That's going obviously going to hit growth. And notionally, according to these figures, make unemployment go up a bit faster than it would rather than say, three and three quarter percent get up to four and a quarter percent, which is it's not nothing. But as as Shane was saying, the figures that scare the hell out of me are real wages. It's I did sort of a quick calculation. And by the time we sort of hit rock bottom of this sort of little bit before they start turning, we'll be in June 2023, June into 2024. And at that point, real wages will be back at the levels they were in 2009, 2010. I mean, that's 14 years of real wages growth lost. And the problem with real wages growth, because it's got inflation and it's got two things sort of working together, it takes a long time to get it back. You don't generally have fast real wages growth. It's not something that one hour our economy and the labor market is geared to produce anymore. In fact, it's kind of geared to keep wages growth down. And so even with their figures of, you know, kind of pretty strong 3.75% wages growth, that would be the fastest since that's real definitely since the GST, sorry, the GFC, not the GST. But but even with that growth by June 2026, which is as far out as as Chalmers figures go, we're still in real wage terms, one and a half, 2% below where we were before the pandemic came along. I've been doing the calculations for tomorrow's story read in the Sydney War ahead of the age that they won't get back from pre COVID levels till at least 27, 27, 28. And you can extrapolate those figures that they've put out, you know, that's where you end up. And that's assuming some kind of good wages growth fees. Yeah, that's right. Yeah, assuming that a that a whole kind of like, you know, 20 years of past practice is all of a sudden abandoned and all of a sudden it's all the last I think it's more the last 10 years, I think more than more 10 than 20. You get through the GFC and you see the big change. Yeah, no, that's true. Yeah, that's that's fair. Don't give away 20 years. No, it's it's not 20. You're right. It's sort of it is the post GFC thing. That's that's right. Now, look, I'll just ask, I will ask the mug question. The obvious one, given we've set up the idea that none of us are getting a real pay increase for, you know, the terms of our natural lives. Obviously, this this new government, the Albanese government went to the voters and made made much of sluggish wages growth, right? Everything's going up except your wages and offer repeated campaign talking point. How do you think this goes politically, Shane, when it's, you know, obviously, now the message is already being adjusted? We've been fortunate, in fact, in one way, which is the Fair Work Commission decision, giving five point two, because over twenty two, twenty three, that will be about in line if these forecasts come to pass, which is five and a quarter for twenty two, twenty three, the bottom 200000 people in the country will be on par with inflation. Yep. That just leaves thirteen point four million people going, scratching their heads, going, oops, hold on. So you go, right, there is always a little honeymoon, but I think the honeymoon ends in the budget. I think that's where like they'll get they'll get some goodwill out of the job summit because there'll be this all this talk about, oh, we can do this, this, this from both all sides will be saying we can find a way. Yeah. But the reality really hits the road probably in the next month and a half as the electricity bills start to flow through everyone but Canberra's. Yes. Yes. We are in the renewables principality. Yes. The Soviet Socialist Republic. The ACT actually will see a fall in electricity prices, not in gas prices, but in electricity prices. Yeah. So that will start coming through. There will be the complaints from people as they see their new yearly rates. Yes. Yes. Plus the every bank lifting their mortgage rates that starts to sting. So you get to the budget and there'll be a little bit of pent up anger, particularly even with the the end of the fuel excise discount. This is I think we've discussed this before. I mean, it's sort of like I honestly cannot wrap my mind around the government. I mean, I know the government has to because, you know, you can't keep you can't keep doing this, but it's sort of like, God, my brain explodes when I think about the political reality of them actually doing it. But what do you think, Greg? Interestingly, I don't know if you guys saw it, but in our Guardian Essential this week, there was sort of we asked a bunch of questions about how do you think the government's doing on a range of fronts? And look, it wasn't they weren't being smashed or eviscerated, but certainly where the negative where the negative feedback was from the voters was cost of living, right? For obvious reasons. So what do you reckon about the politics of it, Greg? Politics is pretty awful. In some ways, the politics is worse with inflation than when you've got rising unemployment, because with rising unemployment, you can think about stimulus measures and you can you can't lower interest rates. But killing inflation, there's not a lot of nice ways to do it. So sort of blunt, blunt, blunt trauma, right? And I think it also in terms of the politics, given the I think the almost overriding message about Scott Morrison, that really hurting was the hold, don't hold a hose kind of narrative, that sort of sense of, you know, it's someone else's problem, which means Labour can't really say that. You know, I think that I think that pretty much already hit the wall of we've only been in office, what have we. It's nine weeks and you can't. That was the line today. So that's still sort of saying and it's like, yeah, I think that's getting tied. I think that was fine right up until this week. You're back at parliament now. Sorry, you're in charge. And as annoying as that is, and perhaps unfair, because certainly they didn't do anything to create this inflation problem. Sorry, you wanted the office. You got it. And I think certainly by the time October comes around and the budget, it's all on you. I think looking further on, how is this all going to play out with wages, wages growth? I think what they're going to have to think about is sort of non wages aspects of household income and what can be done there. And that might and sort of things like lowering childcare prices actually also has an impact on inflation sort of bizarrely. So I think that might be where there is some focus, but Christ, I don't sort of envy them. What do you guys think about because obviously we saw an interesting case study over the last couple of weeks where obviously the government attempted to allow pandemic leave payments to lapse. Now that was obviously budget related, right? Like Jim Chalmers, Katie Gallagher, the whole expenditure review committee process is absolutely underway and rolling. They had factored in, because Scott Morrison obviously said, here's the end date. Now the government has worked for correct reasons, public health reasons has said, oh no, actually we're extending until September. So that's another bit of expenditure that wasn't, they hadn't factored in and it's big dollars. Do we think that with all of these difficulties that Labour's policy agenda is imperiled to the extent that you've got the events problem, right? Like, oh my God, we've got to spend, you know, $11 billion on this thing. Therefore, what happens to their election promises when you're getting into that territory where it's sort of, Greg's making the point, you wouldn't want to be there. Well, it is the worst of all worlds to the extent that more spending will hit the budget. You know, the outlook isn't as good. And it sort of makes the whole debt and deficit thing maybe hover around in some parallel universe as well, which is difficult for them. What do you reckon, Shane? I'm not sure they're in trouble yet because their agenda was relatively small. Yeah. The Liberal Party has been trying to make a point about all this extra spending and for the life of me, I haven't quite worked out why they're going down this path because it was so, the differences between the two were very small. And so, if you're going to spend money on childcare, well, I'm not sure that's going to lose you at all. And then much of the other stuff, like there's some of it's off budget, which again, won't hit the budget bottom line. So, the agenda in what they took in that space isn't off the rails by any stretch of the imagination yet. I keep coming back to the thought that I had for a long time, especially in amongst the gallery was that the political nouse of Anthony Albanese had been underestimated because this guy has been around a very long time and you can't survive in the New South Wales Labor Party for a long time without having some sort of ability. In the minority faction. Yes. Which he has done. And so, you know that they're thinking, right, this is a three year and he has talked about a six year agenda at least. So, you make the toughest decisions early and then wrangle your way back. And if you're looking, say, at these economic forecasts, you get to 23, 24, when's the next election? It's going to be early 25. Okay, real wages are growing. The Reserve Bank will have started cutting interest rates by then. So, you're playing out there. You've got to ride it out and make the best of it as you can. So, that's why you've got charmers going so hard with the like the ashen face, the baton as the bad cop thumping anything he can find. So, you can see that playing out. That's the political rhetoric going into the economic rhetoric. But again, it still comes to whether they can land everything on the economic side of things they can. And so, I actually think they say the the audit of waste and then becomes something that they'll use as a cudgel. Yeah. To keep the little party. You should never waste a crisis. And this is a crisis. And they're smart enough to know that if there are some things that they would like to change, maybe you stay through tax cuts. Yes. So, I disagree. I just don't think you can get rid of the like they are 20, 24. So, that's still a long way off. Push them back. And I think there'd be Peter Dutton would be up talking about LAW law tax cuts very quickly. And a killed Keating. Yeah. Killed a bunch of killed Keating. I just think I've always thought they're going to do it. And a carbon tax that never existed killed Julie. No, I don't know. I agree with your position intellectually. When we've got inflation going and everyone going, what, inflation is going, you're putting more petrol on the fire. I think, you know, yeah, of course, Dutton's going to go LAW and it killed Keating. But it killed Keating at the end of his when he was dead. Yeah. But this is a really good thank you for leading me to this ledge because I just want us to to to pause. Well, no, no, we definitely don't jump off until we finish the podcast, guys. Fair enough. No, no, I just it is interesting this sort of, you know, we can see, you know, as we've mapped out, right, in just this last couple of minutes, right, that there is a way to ride out the storm. And as Greg says, you never waste a crisis. That's absolutely true. I guess the question I've got is whether or not the voters are patient in the sense of, you know, look, things are going to be things are going to be rough, guys, right? That's the bad news that we're sharing with you. Things are going to be rough, probably for, you know, six, twelve months, really, like that's going to be the worst of it. Right. None of us are going to enjoy this period. It's sort of, I don't know, it's sort of an un a question I can't answer in my mind about whether or not people will look at these conditions, think, yeah, you inherited most of these if they don't make an absolute, you know, absolutely diabolical cock up of the whole business, whether people just have the patience themselves to ride it out and not necessarily punish the government of the day. What do you reckon? I mean, we're guessing, obviously. Well, yeah. And there is a reason that there's really there's only been one one term government. Yeah. And we have to go back to poor old Jim Scullin getting elected two weeks out from the great crash that's precipitate of the Great Depression. So to his start, but I get take your point as that the short termism short termism has accelerated. And we people seem less patient to me. Well, we can see it with people reading a copy online, for instance. Yeah. Like if you don't grab them, like they're not going to play out through two or three hundred of the most perfect words if they ever composed. Yeah, that's right. And yeah, you are Shakespearean in your approach to copy Catherine. So yeah, that's that's what you end up with like that the demand for immediacy. Yes, I guess that's the question I've got in my life. We've got people fighting over eleven dollar lettuces in Isles in the moment, like whether and we saw it during the covid people fighting over bloody toilet rolls. Yeah. Like yeah, when things get bad, sort of. But anyway, but cats and dogs living together. Well, no, but I mean, covid did demonstrate also the resilience to the population in the end. I mean, there was there was lots of scary business, but it did represent the resilience. But yeah, anyway, look, it's an unanswered question in my mind. How patient are we? I mean, yeah, they might be impatient, but they also still have to look at the alternative. And I don't think the alternative is in a fit state at this point in time. Maybe they'll get there. But they I think that I think they know how to do a cost of living campaign. Yeah, but I mean, but what's the cost of living campaign in three years time? Yeah, exactly. And yes, yeah, that's certainly why I miss question time today. But they seem to be focusing more on unions. So I don't know if there is much strategy going on. And I think, yeah, people might get impatient, but I'm not certainly we've seen it state government levels. But but that's when things are really there has been perhaps a real lot of broken promises. Yeah, which is why I mean, I don't think they will dump the stage three tax cuts, even though I would if I well, I would push them back. But that's why I'm not in politics. And I'm in the think tank telling him to dump the stage for a tax cut. But I just think three years unless things are not turning around and things are going and also as usual, there's been scandals or they don't seem like they have a clue. Yeah, it's all predicated on. I always go back to first term of the right government. They kicked out the kicked out Cameron Rudd and they still got over the line just yet. So you really have to stuff up and labor tried to stuff. Oh, they did everything they could. Yes, yes. They did everything they could to kick themselves in the head repeatedly. Anyway, I just want to ask you both about the bank, the bank capital capital reserve. Well, I know, Shane, I'll be hot to try it on this. And I imagine you will have views to create the right review. You do know it's called the right review, the right review because you're responsible because of that excellent series, which we've spoken about. If you're a regular, you'll know we've actually we've given Shane more than high five for his excellent series on the Reserve Bank. If you haven't looked at that, you should chase it down. It's easy to chase down. But anyway, various things going on. Kids, we've got rising rates obviously still and we have this review, the right review. There's been quite a lot of chatter over the last couple of weeks about a few things about that. Should we have this review when the bank has a very serious job to do? Right. I've seen that kind of out about rubbish. Well, I agree. Let's not talk about climate change after a bushfire. No, I know. Let's kick the ball around a bit. Okay. All right. I've seen that view expressed. I've seen a fair bit of tutting about the prime minister who I think it was last week. Time's a bit elastic. But during an interview with Neil Mitchell in Melbourne did something quite unusual. He reflected on what the bank perhaps should or shouldn't be thinking about, which prime ministers generally don't do. So that's going on. Then we've got this review itself. Kick off shame. What do you make of all of those little moving parts? The response to Albanese saying don't overreach. I find interesting because outside of this country, politicians, prime ministers do reflect on monetary policy. We've dug ourselves into this. The Reserve Bank, the high priests of Martin Place, we bow down to their intellect. But sometimes they're just naughty boys. There is the independence issue. There is the independence thing, but no one's saying that Chalmers is about to rock up and knock them out of there and say everybody out. I'm bringing Sally McManus and the rest of the ACTU in to run monetary policy. No, we haven't got to that point. But I find that interesting just the international context and the fact that we in this country have really moved away from having any criticism of what the Reserve Bank does from our political leaders. But you get out and you can see it when Chalmers announced it, all these TV reporters saying, oh, is this because the Reserve Bank stuffed up by lifting interest rates? The thing is the review is not because of what they've been doing the last six months. It is what they were doing before COVID. Well, but also, I mean, the context for the review surely is, you know, we as Gen X Tragic, the three of us, we had the 80s fashion and the drags to bikes. And so, right. So we were sort of from the inflation era, the three of us. We've spent a lot of time on this podcast in this configuration battling with the sort of cognitive dissonance of the low inflation environment, which we all struggled to process. Now we're feeling more comfortable. Now it's back to, you know, very familiar territory. But I'm sort of raving about that to make a point. It's sort of like it's not only that the sort of individual decision making that, as Shane says, stretches far beyond whether or not you increase rates in order to deal with inflation. It's the whole context around it. It's a whole set of decisions. And it's also a whole sort of moving in the, you know, sort of whatever the equivalent of economic tectonic plates has been over the last 20 years. Like there's a whole bunch of rules that we certainly grew up with, the three of us, for how economies work that, you know, really haven't seemed to work that well really over the last sort of since the post GFC period. So anyway, I'm just putting that out there as a bit of context. So Greg, what do you think about the bank, the review, whether or not Prime Minister should reflect? Where do you kind of land on that stuff? Yeah, I mean, you're certainly right where we come from a different environment. So different, I remember getting Kate Bush's Running Up That Hill was on a song that I got on a tape from my sister in 1986. Obviously. Yes, for Christmas, a tape. So you didn't record it off the radio when it came? No, no, on a tape with other... Well, that's how you do it. That was my tape. 1986 out now with other classics from Kids in the Kitchen. Oh my God. Yes, a classic of the compilation genre. So we certainly come from an environment where inflation was just, you know, 6%, 7% inflation. Well, that's what it is. That's what it was. Yeah, that's right. There's suddenly, in the 90s, there was no, the Reserve Bank are lords and masters and we don't reflect on them and they are always right. And I wonder if Albenizi's sort of little comment, and it was nothing major, but it was sort of what you'd expect someone to sort of be suggesting about interest rates, not going too hard, be careful. If that is a little sighter into the realisation that if you're reviewing an organisation and you've got a lot of problems with the economy, it's always good to find a bad guy and the Reserve Bank and perhaps even if they want to get really into a Philip Blow, who's probably going to be ending up anyway next year, there's no sort of suggestion his term is going to be extended. You know, you've got a full guy and... But you've got a full board. Yeah, exactly. Full board. Well... And, you know, the reality is... Like, can you start on the board? Yeah. No, no, no. Exactly. So I think this, what Shane's saying is right. The problem with the Reserve Bank is not that they're raising interest rates now to keep inflation down, it's that they kept interest rates flat while inflation was well below 2% for five years or something like that and unemployment was stuck, you know, 6% around there. So it's... That's... But also what is a big problem and one that I've seen sort of mentioned around the traps is also the commentary in the response to the pandemic that we're going to keep interest rates where they are basically until 2024 and that fueled a huge housing boom prices coupled with the Home Builder Program and then suddenly it's, oh, did I say to a 20, 40, well, I meant it now. And, you know, now whether or not that's fair, but I think it could be a very politically smart way to play it perhaps. There are dangers, but, you know, I think people don't like interest rates going up and there's one person or one board in charge of that and you can say, you guys don't really know what you're doing. Well, you put it this way, if a government stuffs up every three years, people can cast their view. Yeah. The Reserve Bank, no. And like there is a reason with every central bank has gone down this path. We've got to take the interest rates out of the hands of politicians because they were being pro-cyclical with their movements and it was creating all sorts of economic problems. But yes, fill those at the top of the board. But the board appointed, like every person on that board is appointed, has been appointed by the Scott Morrison or Josh Freidenberg. If it was a private company, the board would be, there'd be demands for the board to go because, yeah, like they haven't hit the target. Yes. For a long time either the lower upside. So it's, and that's, I find that I think this will be one of the interesting discussions in the review because the Australian board is so unusual. Like it is a Cindy Lauper, she's so unusual sort of board because no other central bank has a board which is plucked from amateurs. Here's your job, run the economy. The economy through monetary policy. And that's, this is an idea that Ted Theodore, the, up until this year, the only treasurer to lose his seat in the election, he came up with that idea in the thirties and it was picked up a few years later and that's how we've ended up with this situation. Yeah, right. But it is so very much unusual and yet Lowe defends the input of the business people who are on the board and that, of course, that's what he should be doing. But you've got to stand back and say, right, is it the best way to have monetary policy? Like there's two big economic policy levers in this country, fiscal monetary, leave it to a bunch of people who once a month get around, they're not trained in this space. They listen to, they supposed to give an insight to what's going on, but God, there's a lot of other organisations and people who can give you insights into what's going on in the economy, locally, nationally, nationally. Yeah, I think this will be one of the interesting bits and you can see where Chalmers is already thinking, saying, right, I've extended the term of Mark Bonaba by 12 months. Yep. When he breaks term comes up two months after that and then Phil Lowe's seven year term ends in September. So, and the report will come in in March. So he's given himself a chance to reorganise the board. And I think politically having a fight in parliament would be extraordinary about him. Say Chalmers comes in says, right, we're going to change the way the entire board's carved up. That would be something that we haven't seen, like an absolute fight, I think would ensue. Yeah, well, we sort of be, yeah, we'll be back to that sort of, you know, re-drawing of economic institutions, you know, sort of. Yeah, yeah. Anyway, it's really interesting. And we will we will gather and talk more about this, obviously, as the review progresses and we get closer. I just I mean, this is, you know, this is sort of, you know, silly really, but I feel as though we have to end on on the question. Why did running up the hill get to number one? And is that the worst thing to happen? Actually, it's been lighter than I thought. Yeah, it's been a good year. Look, look, this year, Kate Bush was up for the US rock and roll fame. Yes. Yes. Where she again, did not get selected. But the person who covered Kate Bush, Pat Benatar, did. Wow. Pat Benatar on the album in which she released to us, hit me with your best shot, a breakthrough single included Love is a Battlefield. A couple of years later, but a great, tremendous song. Was it not on that album? No, Love is a Battlefield is about three, four years later. But I could see you in those tie as ripped dresses. I had I had the whole wardrobe. I had the whole wardrobe. Yes. Pat Benatar did a cover version of Wuthering Heights. Oh, my God. It is terrible. It's got to be terrible. Yes, it's it's no placebo cover of Running Up the Hill, which is really very good. It's a very good cover version. Yeah. Yes. No, but anyway, it wasn't Kate Bush. Although we've we've got the question. No, no, sorry. We're sessions. Sorry, James. I mean, we should end on a high, really. But we will. I suspect well, there's an answer. Recession. Yes. No. Oh, geez. Come on. Put it on the line. Go on, Greg. Just be just to set this up better. I'm sorry, because I didn't really set that up. There is discussion. There's there is a conversation around the world if you're not following economics closely about whether America is already in a shallow recession, what might happen about China. There's all bad business happening in the global economy, headwinds, etc. Obviously, in this economic statement that we have referenced in this episode, the growth figures were revised down, obviously. Still about three percent. Yes. Anyway, so look, you know, recession, it's like, you know, what do you reckon? I actually wrote about this column on this very subject a couple of weeks back. So just condense into one or two words. Guardian Australia. No, I opened the article with the sage words of Reverend Lovejoy of log story. No, with a niff and short story. Yes. But there goes rock and and all kind of think that the risk is higher than it has been outside of the pandemic, which is just a yeah, but it's higher than it has been since the GFC. But one would hope that and I think the real risk here is a reserve bank that they are just the the overreach. I don't think labor are going to be slamming on the austerity breaks. It just seems unlikely. And it's not really in their their way of thinking of things. And but if the Reserve Bank follows what the market is saying and keeps hiking interest rates up to over the cash rate up to over three and a half percent, I think it's a it's a very real chance of a significant slowdown. And especially given what's happening in America, the risks are there. But I think we should avoid it. Yeah. And I'm just trying to be positive. No, no. Well, this is a failure of me. This is a sadist looking face. We should have gone. I always try and end on a happy note. Anyway, here we are in the recession. Sorry about that. Well, as Kate would say, I hold a cup of wisdom, but there is nothing within. This could be the whole this could be the definition of this whole podcast, I tell you. So you're not going there. You're not saying one way or the other. No, no, I don't think I think it's really difficult for Australia to have a recession. There is a yeah. Like especially once say that the borders are open now and you starting to see more people coming in. Australia has used population growth as a real buffer against recession for the last 30 years. Yeah. When you're exporting so much in the way of dirt as we do, we do very well. That's what we do. It's our business. It's really difficult. I think it and 60 percent of the economy is consumers. Consumers are still spending. They haven't withdrawn and the RBA might hit. I don't think they'll get to three point six. But the Reserve Bank and I get I got actually angry with people. Some TV journals going, oh, the Reserve Bank doesn't know what's going to do. I said, yeah, I think the RBA really doesn't want to drive the country into recession. I think that's not their great. It's not their long term plan. I think Philip was to leave the chair. Yeah, that's a. See you later. And I think you're right there. Mining is I mean, Australia's economy is so wacky, really. I mean, mining is going mad and you look at the profits and everything mining profits going. They're just making money hand over fist. I think the issue there, if we're talking just GDP, no. But as I sort of with my labor market sort of policy director had on, you know, when real wages are going to go down nearly four percent from peaks, is that not a good enough sort of definition of what a recession is for a lot of people? It'll be it'll feel like it. I'm all worried about the real wages not turning like Chalmers is saying that they will then it's going into recession. That's my big fear. OK, well, beautifully put. And thank you to you both because it's a really busy day Thursday that we're recording. So I appreciate both of your time. I appreciate all your good folks for listening and getting in touch. Did you ever get called Kathy? Oh, God, no. No. Oh, absolutely. No, actually, I'm hiring Heights. Yeah. Bush. No, no, no. It all comes back to Kate. Actually, actually. Oh, no, that's a whole other podcast. And you keep my name. No, no. Kate was fine. But no, I had a visceral dislike to Cassie. Only my beloved Nan insisted on calling me Cassie. But she was the only person who got away with it. I don't know why, but I still have a slightly visceral reaction to it. Anyway, it's weird. Anyway, as we all were, thank you to you wonderful people for listening and sharing and getting in touch with all of us on social media after these episodes. We really enjoy it with musical references and or other thoughts. Thank you to Alison Chan, who's producing us this week. Thank you to Miles Martagnone, who's the EP of this show. We will be back next week.