 Hello, it's Catherine Murphy, you're on Australian Politics Live. I'm joined this week by my camper pack. Hello. Hi, Merv. They're smiling at me. They may even laugh. In the studio this week, my partner in crime, Sarah Martin, who is Guardian Australia's chief political correspondent, and also Paul Karp, or as he's known in the office, Paul Karp QC, who is joining us. Now, we're going to do two things in this pod, one reasonably conventional, one slightly unusual. We're going to have a chat first up because it is 12 months since Scott Morrison ascended into the Prime Ministership, whichever word you want to use. Brad Brewstyle. That's something like that. And we just want to take stock of where things are at just in this moment in time. And then we're going to throw two questions from the audience. How do you read us? How do you read us? Who have given us actually a list of doozies, which we are all kind of clapping our hands with joy and looking forward to getting into. But let's just start with the oldie ascension of Prime Minister Morrison 12 months on. Now, I don't know about you guys, but, and well, actually, that's a lie. I do know about you guys because we're just basically retailing a conversation that we have quite often in the office, just with the listeners. The most notable thing, I shouldn't say most notable, but one of the more notable things I think about where we're at at the moment is how comparatively quiet things are. And by that, I don't mean boring. I just mean that I'm very conscious myself. I feel like for the first time in, I don't know how long, probably a decade, I do not feel dragged behind this kind of crazy out of control political process, new cycle, everything else. I feel sort of almost like it's the olden days where one can think about things, have a bit of a delve journalistically and all of that sort of stuff. So Morrison, several Prime Ministers have tried to execute this, let's all keep calm and slow things down a bit. But so far, and that's all I'll say, he's succeeded. What do we think about this? Well, it's funny because it is the thing that leaders have been saying sort of over the past decade, let's not talk about ourselves. We need to talk about the Australian people. Julie Gillard tried it, Tony Abbott tried it, Malcolm Turnbull tried it, all without success. So I think initially when Scott Morrison said, we don't want to dial down the volume, focus on the Australian people, stop talking about ourselves. I think a lot of people in this place kind of smiled riley and thought, oh, well, good luck with that, mate. So far, she's succeeding. I think the reason it usually doesn't work is that the opposition comes to fill the void when the government says it wants politics off the front page. But the reason it has worked so far this time is that because of the unexpected election result, Labor finds it much more difficult to fill that void. They haven't yet worked out which bits lost them the election, which bits they're going to keep. And as a result, you have both of them quiet at the same time for once. Yeah, well, that's a good observation. Do we think too, though, I just have this suspicion myself that we are partly involved in this as well, that there might be some sort of, oh, let's desire and put it at too high an order. But we're all exhausted, fatigued, miscombobulated too, as well as by we, I should make it clear that I'm talking about political journalists. It's sort of it's not like we've all gone out to lunch. Quite the contrary. In fact, I think there's some very interesting stories being prosecuted at the moment, precisely for the reason that we've all got five minutes to think. But do you think we're part of it as well as there? I think it's a sad reality that a lot of people in our profession in this place have thrived on a diet of conflict and tension for quite some time. And I've been in Canberra five years. And I think in that time, it has been very much that type of reporting. It's very reactive. It's very conflict driven. It's very much focused on the politics of politics, less so on what politics means for people in the outside world. I think most journalists prefer that type of reporting. I think most journalists do want to do good public interest reporting, but you kind of get swept up into the madness of federal politics. So I think, yes, I think there is a desire for journalists to take the time to scrutinize, to see what's actually going on rather than being focused on the sort of in turn a scene warfare of both political parties. There's also much less horse race reporting because I mean, with the unexpected election result, the polling even weeks out from the election wasn't replicated on the day. And so there's much less of a sense of the importance of trying to give their relative to position. And when Anthony Albanese says, oh, well, you know, the next election isn't for three years time, and that's the one we actually have to win, not the 20 news polls in a row or whatever, I think that's reflected in the reporting is much less who won the day, who won the 6pm news, because it's just not that relevant. Yeah, well, that's right. Now, and how, how do we think, you know, sort of lifted up about out of this observation that things are a bit more quiet? How do we think both sides are coping? Because it's certainly the only election I have ever covered where the result was not what either side expected. But that is, that's the first for me, although I was on a panel actually, the Canberra Writers Festival this weekend with Michelle Gratton, who reminded everybody who came along to that session that it was very much like the Houston Keating election, which is obviously before my time. So in which she said it was very similar dynamic, everybody thought, oh, Houston would win and then and Keating hit back and won. So similar, she, she described a similar feeling in both instances, right? That's funny, because the week before the election, I remember chatting to Michelle in the corridor, I said, what do you think, and she said, well, I expect Labour will win, but I was surprised in 93. So this could be like 93. You just never know. So, you know, absolutely, that's a good observation. So it's so anyway, what do we think? What do we think of how they they the protagonist, not us for a minute, the protagonists, you know, Scott Morrison and the coalition and Anthony Albanese and Labor are managing being in a different world to the one they thought they'd been. I think the coalition is managing much better than the Labor Party. Paul. I think they're surprised about needing to come up with a three year agenda, but that's a good problem to have. So yeah, I think they're handling it pretty well. And the few breakouts are from backbenchers that are like, now we're in power. Let's let's really do something. Let's let's turn it up. You know, let's free superannuation or something. So what do we think about that? It's a general dynamic, because it's sort of I think it's fair to observe that the government, you know, setting aside Sarah's point about Labor, we'll return to that in a sec. But the top heavy bottom heavy phenomenon in this government at the moment is this top heavy, obviously, Scott Morrison, you know, all conquering hero, plus front bench, then a bunch of backbenchers or junior ministerial types who think that government needs to be about something other than winning an election you didn't expect to win. Henceforth, here are my bountiful ideas on a range of subjects. How do we think that's going to play out? Well, it's interesting because Scott Morrison has obviously decided that it's not particularly helpful to have backbenchers out there freelancing on policy ideas and has has discouraged them from doing so on sky, for example. And there was the audit soon after the election where there was something like 25 MPs making an appearance on sky within a week. And they were like, well, what are you doing? Why are you talking about things that aren't decided yet? And you're going to have far more success if you want to pursue particular policy initiatives by going through the party's processes. Now, that's all well and good. But it is the Liberal Party. They do like the sound of their own voices and they like to ventilate ideas. And for some, obviously, that it's not going to work and they will continue to freelance and put stakes in the ground on certain issues. So there is a little bit of disgruntled from from some they don't think it's fair that there is this edict on backbenchers. So I think it will continue, but probably not to the extent that it did before when it was often used as a proxy for, you know, for leadership intentions. Yes, exactly. Paul, I think the people at the top of the government have survived the near death experience and they're very grateful for that. And they don't want to now descend into infighting and division. But the backbencher people who, you know, filled vacancies of people who thought they were rats leaving a sinking ship or were elected unexpectedly in this, you know, high tide for them. And so they're a bit more bullish about it because they didn't have that near death experience. And so they're floating ideas as a result. Do we think well, we don't know well, we sort of all need to be out of the predictions business given what happened in the election campaign. But sort of our consensus here is that it'll probably keep going in some shape or form. Now, you know, whether this matters or not at the end of the day, I guess we'll find out. Yeah, well, I think if the government needs to have an agenda, so then they've got something to talk about, otherwise inevitably, you know, nature abhors a vacuum, people will talk about other issues of their choosing. So I think probably they can address what they see as a problem by coming up with an agenda of their own. Yes, actually something to do. And Labor, what do we think? Sarah, you said the government's doing better than Labor. Well, obviously, they're very bruised and battered. And it's an extended period of wound licking going on. And I think, as we've both heard from MPs, the weather or review is acting something of an extended therapy session for a lot of people who were obviously hopeful of a different result. That review process is actually quite short. It's due to be sort of wrapped up in October, I think is right. So that will be part of the recalibration that they're going through. But obviously, they're still feeling pretty shell-shocked. Yes, Paul, thoughts? They're in a process of working out what their core values are, which are the things that might have cost them the election, like franking credits or like the handling of coal, that they might have to ditch, and which are the things that they absolutely can't ditch that are their core business. And other than a few more leaks than there were under Shorten, Albanese suffered a few more leaks than Shorten did. There hasn't been major outbreaks of fighting yet, but the despondency at the result is the main mood. We'll move on now because we want to get through this list of questions. Now, apologies in advance to anybody whose question didn't get up in this list because there were a number of them and we won't be able to get through all of them. I won't name people because people have Twitter handles that may not be G-rated, so we'll answer the questions. I don't know. Well, that's right. Yes, anyway, just hold on to your hats, people. No, it'll be fine. Let's start with one that was slightly left field for me, but I did actually laugh out loud. We just call this one Peter Dutton colon Y, but the question was expressed this way. Why is Peter Dutton, this is in the 12 months on theme, still in the position he is in? Is he like the headsman of a village? Interesting thought. And then it's a sort of summation, it's a dirty job, but our base wants us to do it, which I take to mean, forgive me if I've interpreted this question incorrectly, dear reader, that someone's got to be the bomb thrower. Somebody's got to come out and hate everyone or have the sharp rhetoric or be hyper partisan and dux as you like. So Peter Dutton, why, Sarah? Well, this reader clearly missed the series of Peter Dutton smiling articles that appeared over the past 12 months. Look, Peter Dutton, why? Well, look, we've got to remember Queensland in this equation, and we have to remember that while a lot of people were talking about Peter Dutton potentially losing his seat, he most certainly did not and increased his margin. So Peter Dutton is popular among certain parts of the population, deeply unpopular among certain parts of the population, but is seen differently by, as the dear reader suggests, the base. So look, I think Scott Morrison wanted to avoid it. I mean, Scott Morrison's happy for him to be in that position. I don't think there'd be any advantage for the Morrison government in him being removed from that position and would just agitate the Conservatives. And we all know what a bunch of agitated Conservatives can do. So good. Paul, what do you think? Obviously, he's the critical player in the right, because Morrison also kind of dances sometimes with the right, but sometimes not. Dutz is 100% the kind of most powerful player in the right because Corman's a bit diminished these days. Yeah, so it's a balance between the Liberal and Conservative tradition in the Liberal Party, and Scott Morrison became Prime Minister of the votes of his small centre-right faction and all the moderates from Turnbull swinging in behind him. But even then, it was like a close 45-40 against Dutton. So the Conservative faction, the hard-right faction is very large. And we've just seen what happens when a Prime Minister like Turnbull accommodates for a while, but eventually is dispensed with by the Conservative faction. So he can't afford war with them. And he's a pragmatist, and we did a part on Morrison before the election. And one of the things he did when he was State Director of New South Wales is he appointed two deputy directors, one from the right and one from the left, because he realised that that was going to be the most conducive way to having a happy branch. So he's the ultimate pragmatist and there's just no way he would pick that fight. I mean, he's a creature of the New South Wales party, which is highly factionalised. And the war continues to this day in New South Wales. So he's not that stupid. No, no, absolutely. But I suppose the open question, which we won't answer in this podcast, is when people put themselves forward in politics as leadership contenders, particularly people who don't necessarily think that that's their end point, although Peter Dutton may have been born thinking that being Prime Minister is his end point. But when they cross that threshold, it is hard for them mentally to step back off it. That's been my observed experience of the cohort that we watch. So there's nothing to point to to suggest that Peter Dutton is around still with his knapsack, you know, in his leadership. What is it? Batter on in his knapsack or whatever that ridiculous phrase was? I mean, you know, let's not get overexcited, but it's just I'll be interested to see how he sort of how he settles into this term, because it's you're absolutely right. I reckon what about Morrison and how Morrison will want to play it. But there's two people in this tango. So the question is whether or not Dutton wants to play the same sort of football. Anyway, we'll see. So moving on. Now, our next question is, how can we ensure full transparent democracy in Australia? And did we ever have one? Now, this is sort of obviously sounds a dreadfully melancholic question, but it's it's sort of the premise of it is no one seems to be accountable for their decisions anymore. You know, we've had this long drawn out debate over ICAC. Can we trust the old mechanisms for accountability anymore? It very much exemplifies this disillusionment, I guess, photo disillusionment. So it's a serious question. How do we answer it? It's a very good question. I think there's a lot of practical things that can be done, but I fear won't be done that could improve the transparency and accountability about democracy, things such as FOI laws, which are, you know, a complete misnomer in this country. The FOI process is probably corrupt. It is very difficult to get information from government departments. And we know that there's often negotiation between departments and ministerial officers about what is released and what is redacted. That would be a really good start if that was actually a properly independent, accountable process that was easier to access by journalists. But the list is long. Exactly. What do you think, Paul? Well, I think a National Integrity Commission, we've got a kind of weak model that the coalition's put forward. So not likely to see any improvements there. One bright spot, though, is I think there's a lot of concern about the truth or misrepresentation of political advertising, first with the MediScare campaign in 2016 from Labor and in the most recent election with the Chinese language signs in Ku Yong and Chisholm. And of course, the electoral matters committee looks at the last election. And I think that both parties do have an incentive now to try and draw a line somewhere because otherwise it's just going to we're just going to be circling the drain and setting a lower and lower bar on those things. It will be interesting, I agree, to see how the both parties approach that committee process that you've just flagged as in just for folks listening on who don't know this, every after every election, the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters does a review of the election just gone and considers potential reforms to the electoral system as a consequence of what they've learned during the campaign. Now Paul's optimism, which I applaud, is that maybe the major parties will have reached a point in terms of truth and truthiness that both see a benefit in trying to legislate for more truth, for more accountability, because otherwise, it's one hell of an arms race we're entering about, you know, basically you can say anything in election campaign now and apparently get away with that without sanction. It's only going to get worse with deep fake videos as well where, you know, people won't be chopping up things that people actually said it will be literally stuffing words in their mouth with things they never said. Well, love, I could not agree more, but I think it is it will be all I would just say it like that. I think it'll be interesting to see what they bring forward and whether or not there are any sort of productive armistice can be reached. I mean, the only reason I hesitate is not because I'm an old and cynical and dreadful person. It's just that it seems all of these integrity issues seem to me to be a no brainer to a greater or lesser extent when you've got voters who are very alienated from the system. And yet we never quite get there. This is the thing that frustrates me with Morrison saying, oh, everything we do, we have to put the Australian people in the center of our sites and it's all about the Australian people. Well, you know, help journalists do their jobs and make the system more accountable. You know, truth in advertising, absolutely. FOI laws, real time financial disclosure to donations to political parties. If someone makes a financial donation this week, we're not going to know about it until 2021. So there's a whole bunch of things that if Morrison was was was genuine about improving the system so that Australians were at the center of all our concerns, then I think there's a bunch of things that he could put on the table that would prove that. And I'll say by way of reassurance to the listeners, we will continue to prosecute these issues vigorously in our little team and we will do our best for you, I promise. Now, OK, so another question now, the government is signaling that it won't budge on its commitment to a budget surplus, even if there is a downturn. And obviously there's a live debate at the moment, given the trade war and other things about whether or not the world is about to face a really massive economic shock that will obviously pick up Australia in its wake. Now the questioner says, given the Australian government's response during the global financial crisis is was viewed as world leading, I kept us out of a recession. Why is the government keeping on saying that, you know, if there's to be a shootout between stimulus and the surplus, that the surplus will win? Sarah? I think they're hoping they'll be able to pull off both. I think they are committed to the surplus and politically delivering that surplus is very important to them. Well, they've decided that that is very important and I think they have little choice but to meet that. But I suspect that if stimulus is needed, then they will provide that stimulus because they don't want to be the government that plunges Australia into a recession. Because again, just on the real politics of that, let alone the ramifications for people, that is extremely damaging and risky and everyone wants to avoid that at all costs. So if they can pull that off, keep the surplus and then stimulate, then I suspect they will, even if they just hang on to that one precious year of surplus. Yeah, exactly. Missed it or got it by that much. Yeah, exactly. Paul, any other? Yeah, there aren't too many levers to pull. I mean, the RBA only has one or two rate cuts left before near zero interest rates. So I think they are hoping they don't have to. But if it got really desperate, yeah, they would if they had to. And they have sort of indicated that they are looking at, that they're aware of this problem and Morrison and Friedenberg have both sort of said, you know, there is infrastructure spending in the works and we are aware of this problem. You know, don't think we're not aware of it. So no one can say they weren't warned. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it's anyway, we could do seriously, we could do a whole pod on all the intricacies of this argument, infrastructure, the limits of monetary policy or anyway, but we've we've just given the short answer there, which is we think that they're sort of well, they're hoping for the best and planning for the worst. I think is probably probably the cut through on that. Now, where are we up to on my list? Okay, is there any evidence that the government actually has a policy program or will the next three years all be rhetoric? What do we think? Well, I've spent a lot of the last week watching reheated immigration and national security bills grind their way through through committees. So some of the policy work or some of the policy agenda is just the last term stuff that was never done coming back, you know, zombie like back from the dead. So yeah, it's not complete. It's not hopeful. Or you just think there's a backlog clearing and then maybe something bright will emerge on the horizon. I think I think they're, you know, like the ducks paddling furiously under the water looking for stuff to do for the next three years. But yeah, there is actually some legislation there that it's just that it's old legislation come back and not what we'd call a new agenda. I mean, they're gonna have to come up with a new agenda. And they again, I think they are they've started that process. We know that Morrison has conducted a few of and this is please forgive the jargon, but some of these deep dives on on policy policy areas. So they've done things on indigenous suicide and recycling. And there's another one, but I can't remember. But they're doing a series of these of these policy discussions. We know that they've put IR on the agenda. And Porter is Christian Porter, will be releasing discussion papers on various things later in the year. So they're, they are starting to do some work. But you know, it's a it's a short term of government, they're going to have to get their skates on to come up with this policy agenda that's been apparently going to serve the best interests of Middle Australia without picking too many fights. So unless they're planning to continue this small target strategy in government, which is not out of the question, not out of the question at all, then we're going to need to see some action. Well, we'll anyway, we'll keep you posted on action on the policy front. Now, time's totally against us. This is this is bad, because there are so many questions. So I'm going to crunch together a couple here, because this is this quite interesting. So one reader wonders how we can overcome the straight back, that approach from Morrison, which I interpret to mean, how do we get the Prime Minister to answer questions when he's very adept at not answering them? And then sort of related to that in that it's a media practice question. One reader wonders whether the media's assumption that Shorten, Bill Shorten would win in May, resulted in an unbalanced kind of scrutiny, which helped contribute to Labour's loss on May 18. So let's start with the first. So anybody got any bright ideas about how we get Scott Morrison to answer a question he doesn't want to answer? I'd like to hear the ideas. Exactly. It's very, he's a tough one to crack. If we could all agree that there are certain questions that they've never answered, like what are you going to do if Kyoto carry over credits don't count towards the Paris targets, if we could all agree that there are some things that are very important that he's never answered, then together we could keep asking it until that at least that fact is exposed, if not the actual answer. I think that is sort of the wisdom of the wisdom of babes. And I don't mean that in a patronizing way about my colleague, about the QC. That's right. I think that's, look, all of us in this studio would love to give you an answer, you know, along the lines of we as a collective would crash tackle Scott Morrison to the floor and pin him down until he answered a question. I mean, obviously we would love to have that capacity to, but we don't, but I think persistence is it. I don't, I don't see an alternative, do you Sarah? No, I think persistence is the only way. And I think, you know, on those rare opportunities where we do have press conferences with the, with press gallery journalists, then we need to back up your mates. Yes. Yeah. It doesn't happen. Doesn't happen. Sadly. I mean, well, it should happen more, I think. When the question, when the line of questioning is valid and it is obvious that Morrison doesn't want to answer, and he really is the exemplar of not answering questions that he doesn't want to answer, then, you know, persistence and, and, uh, reinforcements, I think is really the only way to go. I mean, it's funny. It's also in some of talking to someone about this the other day, like state politics is much more sort of rule, you know, a bit more unruly and have these very sort of close press conferences where you're a little huddle standing around the premier and you're all kind of back each other in. And it's very, um, vigorous. Whereas in Canberra, they're quite of quite staged affairs. You know, you've got the, the, the prime minister up the front with the flags and everyone's seated like in little sort of theater type arrangement. So it is a very different, different atmosphere. And I think it is harder to get that sense of, you know, a pack. Not that I want us to be like a pack of animals, but it is a different dynamic and I think it does make it harder or makes it easier for the politician to deflect. Yes. And, and he is particularly good at it for reasons that I still can't entirely fathom. Anyway, persistence, we will do our best. Now to the second part of that question, which is, do we think that the sort of broad scale for one of the better term assumption that Shorten was going to win created unbalanced scrutiny as in more scrutiny for the Labour Party than the government during the election cycle. And that may have been detrimental to Labour's election chances. What do we think? I think the first observation is that we stayed off the bus and, and held them accountable in a different way in terms of speaking to voters in marginal seats and fact checking, you know, factual claims and claims about policy. So we did that in terms of what we witnessed then from questioning on the bus. I think that might have played a part in harsher questioning of Shorten. And I think the climate change issue is a good example of that, where Shorten was expected to provide costings, not of what climate change would cost the government, but how much it would cost companies to reduce emissions, which I think he was able to explain that it depends company to company. It's not something that can even be done. Whereas, you know, the coalition throughout the campaign was peddling, modelling that didn't have any, any value on the benefit of mitigating climate change. Scott Morrison saying that ton for ton they've accounted for how they're going to reduce emissions, but not addressing that question of carry over credits. Or the hundred million megatons, that's technology improvements, or the EV, you know, component that when there's no EV strategy, all of these things. I think there's a couple of things going on. I mean, the election was certainly fought on Labour's policy agenda. You know, they had a large policy agenda and the government had nothing. So, you know, that was a very deliberate strategy so that it was a bizarro election and that everyone was talking about Labour rather than what the government had done. So I think because of that, and because of Labour's vast policy agenda, there was going to be extra scrutiny of what they were putting forward. But I think absolutely right, that expectation did sort of shift the pressure. But then also just as a quick addendum, one thing that was quite interesting, particularly in the first couple of weeks of the campaign, is that Bill Shorten, when he never did press conferences in Canberra, he tried to avoid press conferences in Canberra. So I think in that the initial stages of the campaign, he probably did feel a bit of extra heat or it felt a bit more heated because there was some sort of pent up, you know, desire on the part of the gallery to put questions to Bill Shorten. Yeah. One other thing I would observe just very quickly, because it's not obvious. We are slightly in a no win position, we political reporters, because there was an enormous amount of criticism. For example, after the 2013 election campaign that Tony Abbott won, there was enormous criticism of political journalism and with some justification about the failure to apply sufficient scrutiny to Abbott's election agenda. And I think myself, that a lot of that criticism was valid. So then you learn the lesson, you learn the lesson, you know, if there's if there is to be a change of government, then appropriate scrutiny needs to be made of the alternative government's policies. But, you know, do you get the balance exactly right? Well, this is not a science. This is this is a social science, what we do. So anyway, I'm just I'm just making that point, because it's not obvious to people that there may have been the sort of superficial was previous lessons learned that the sort of superficial response is, oh, the media is terribly biased against labor, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It is more complicated than that. But the lesson you should take from that, shouldn't it be that you don't just apply maximum scrutiny to the alternative government, you apply scrutiny to whichever political actor it is that's trying to get away with saying the least about what they're going to do over the next three years. And because, you know, because labor announced so much policy and and had such a big platform this time, there were answers, there were answers to those questions about what they're going to do for three years. And perhaps, yeah, we need to think about who's trying to avoid. Yes, answering the questions very wise. Now, I still have a pack of questions, sadly, but time is totally against us. So we're going to have to say good night for now. Thank you, as always, for joining us on the show production this week from Miles Marni and from Hannah Isart. You guys know the drill, subscribe, share, tell your friends, etc. If you like to if you like this Q&A format, you know, readers sending in questions and us sort of scratching heads and doing our best to answer them, let us know, because we can build that into the forward production schedule for the pod and offer you different things than just straight chats, long form interviews and all that sort of stuff. If you found this pod useful, let us know. We are all very easy to find, either on the Guardian website, via our emails or on the many social platforms that all of us occupy. And if you think it should be done with cake and tea, or gin and tonic, let us know. Anyway, it's been real. Thank you guys. Thank you very much. And we'll see you next week. Thank you.